The Project Gutenberg eBook of Complete Treatise on the mare and foal at the time of delivery, with illustrations.
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Complete Treatise on the mare and foal at the time of delivery, with illustrations.

Author: Conrad Mitchell

Release date: October 3, 2016 [eBook #53203]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Dianna Adair, Robert Cicconetti and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPLETE TREATISE ON THE MARE AND FOAL AT THE TIME OF DELIVERY, WITH ILLUSTRATIONS. ***

                           COMPLETE TREATISE
                                ON THE
                            MARE AND FOAL,
                       AT THE TIME OF DELIVERY,

                                 WITH
                            ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                ALSO ON
                           COWS AND CALVES,
                                 WITH
                          STALLION AND MARE,
                           WHEN DISEASED BY
                       Gonorrhea (clap) or Pox.

                                 ALSO
                  Diarrhea and Costiveness in Colts.

                                  BY
                           CONRAD MITCHELL.

                           Volksfreund Print
                            Middleburg. PA.
                                 1869

               Entered according to an Act of Congress,
                         in the year 1869, by

                           CONRAD MITCHELL,

              in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court
                 of the United States for the Western
                       District of Pennsylvania.




INTRODUCTION.


Of all the beasts of the field, which we are told, the Lord formed out
of the earth, and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call
them, none has more engaged the attention of the historian and the
philosopher--none has figured more in poetry, in war and in love, than
the horse.

None of the writing, to which we could point the reader, contains more
frequent mention, or more glowing descriptions of the power and beauty
of the horse, than the great Book of Books.

The Bible teaches us, that from whatever land this animal may have
been originally brought into Egypt, that country had already become
a great horse market, even before horses were known in Arabia, the
country with which we are apt to associate all that is most interesting
of this noble beast. Geological researches, however, have discovered
fossil remains of the horse in almost ever part of the world--from
the tropical plains of India, to the frozen regions of Siberia--from
the northern extremities of the new world, to the southern point of
America. But among the Hebrews, horses were rare previous to the
days of Solomon, who had horses brought out of Egypt, after his
marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh, and so rapidly did he multiply
them by purchase and by breeding, that those kept for his own use
required, as it is written, “four thousand stables, and forty thousand
stalls.” Hence, when honored by a visit from the beautiful queen of
Sheba, bringing with her, camels bearing spices, and very much gold
and precious stones, it was doubtless in the contemplation of his
magnificent stud of horses and chariots, kept for the amusement of his
wives and concubines, as well as for his other vast displays of power
and magnificence, that her majesty exclaimed, in the fulness of her
admiration: “Howbeit, I believed not the words, until I came and mine
eyes had seen it, and behold the half was not told unto me.”

Veterinary science has also made great progress from that time down
to the present, and in particular, in the last half century, the
structure of the horse--injuries and diseases to which he is subject,
and the treatment of these, have been investigated, in this country
and abroad, with much diligence and success, both in colleges and in
societies devoted to the cultivation of veterinary knowledge, and by
practitioners, whose education and experience render their observations
worthy of great respect; but notwithstanding all this, there has always
been, to the present time, one point overlooked, which is of greater
importance, than any one that has ever been investigated. I refer here
to a complete treatise on the Mare and Foal at the time of delivery.
This has long been felt as a real want. Not a single engraving,
illustrating this subject has ever been handed to the public, and very
little has been written on the treatment of the mare and the foal at
the time of delivery. When the best authors come to this point, they
say, “call in a veterinary Surgeon.” But, I would ask, where is the
veterinary Surgeon to obtain his information? And yet, not only the
surgeon, but every farmer and breeder should possess a full knowledge
of it.

The man that first enters the stable should be able to administer to
the wants of the mare and the foal. There is no time to be lost--no
time now to obtain information, or to proceed four or five miles for
a surgeon. If all is right, in five minutes all will be well, but if
a false position is presented, the first person that approaches the
animal should be able to administer to the wants of the mare and foal.
If not, there is much danger for the life of the foal, and in a few
hours much danger is to be feared for the safety of the mare.

I have had a very extensive practice in the veterinary business for
more than nineteen years, and found it almost universally to be the
case, that in the event of mal-presentation, the foal had suffocated
before I could reach the spot, although I was but a very few miles
distant. If the foal is raised from its locality, it must be exposed
to the free atmosphere in twenty minutes or it will suffocate, and the
life of the mare will be much in danger. Often, after I had extracted
the foal, I could have obtained twenty dollars for restoring its life.

I have frequently been urged by farmers and breeders, to give them full
instructions on this subject, and especially, at such times, when a
difficult case presented itself, but I always found it impracticable,
as verbal instruction would soon be forgotten, and as no work,
illustrating this subject was in existence. I was induced, therefore,
in order to benefit the farmer and breeder, to publish a complete
treatise on the mare and foal, at the time of delivery, illustrated
by engravings. I had made an effort about seven years ago, but that
little instrument, the “pen,” in my hand, is what the yoke is to the
ox, and so I abandoned it for that time. The cart-whip in my hand is
a fine instrument, but the pen is my abhorrence. Notwithstanding, at
the earnest request of numerous dealers in horses, I was induced in the
Spring of 1869, to offer this work to the public, for the benefit of
the farmer and breeder, and in mercy to the mare and foal.

This work, as the reader will discover, embraces every particular
connected with the subject upon which it treats, with ample engravings,
illustrating the different positions in which a foal is presented--its
natural delivery--false presentations, etc., with lucid explanations
and instructions.

CONRAD MITCHELL.

New Berlin, Pa., July, 1869.




[Illustration: PLATE I.]

The above Engraving represents the Foal, as it is folded up in the womb
of the Mare when fully developed, in the right flank of the animal, the
chest of the Foal toward the tail of the Mare, the front legs turned
backwards, and the hind legs turned forward under the body of the
Foal, the head and neck turned back in its left side, so that the head
will rest on the first false ribs. From the time of covering the Mare,
to the time of foaling, generally requires a period of three hundred
and thirty days. A few instances, however, came under my observation,
in which fine, full-grown, and healthy colts were delivered in three
hundred and twelve days, while others delayed their appearance for a
period of three hundred and ninety days, before the owner could rejoice
in the valuable prize brought to his stable. The full chested, round
trunked mare will develope a foal much sooner than the flat-sided, lean
and camel-backed one.

In nine days after the covering of the mare, the womb will begin to
close about fifteen inches from the entrance; at the same time, the
fecund seed of the horse will change into bloody streaks, and the
balance becomes like cream on curdled milk about six hours after it is
strained, and in from forty to fifty days, the foal will be regularly
shaped, and about the size of a small rat. At the same time a membrane
or skin will spread around the entrance inside of the womb, from which
a number of small cords branch out, uniting together as they run along,
until they form one cord, extending to the navel of the foal, through
which the blood of the mare circulates in the foal, in order to give it
nourishment. At the same time another membrane or skin is formed around
the foal, in which are contained from four to six, and even eight
quarts of yellowish fluid, which answers a twofold purpose: first, it
prevents all friction between the foal and membrane, and secondly, it
assists in raising the foal from its locality. At the first throes of
the mare, the action of the womb will cause the membrane or skin to
protrude through the entrance of the womb, and the fluid will be forced
into it, and the weight will assist in raising the foal, until it will
be presented when the skin will break and the channel will be opened
for the foal to breath.

[Illustration: PLATE II.]

The above Engraving presents the natural position of the foal in
delivery. The two front feet will be presented first, and the muzzle
or the nostrils will rest on the top of the legs, and the membrane
or skin around the foal, spoken of in Plate I, will already protrude
about two feet. The hind legs will sink down more and more, until they
will be stretched out behind horizontally. Sometimes one foot will
raise up too high and be forced against the inside of the entrance.
The hand should be introduced and the foot pushed back a few inches
and then brought back into the channel. Sometimes the forehead will
project against the upper part of the entrance, when the hand should be
introduced, and hold should be taken back of the poll, with a downward
pressure, the other hand to the muzzle to raise it up, and a gentle
pull should be made, when all will be right in a few minutes. The cord
running to the navel of the colt should be tied about one inch from the
surface of the skin, then cut off about one inch from the string, or if
no string is at hand, the cord should be pressed very tightly between
the thumb and the two first fingers of the hand for a few minutes, then
cut off, and it will bleed no more. The colt should be drawn away a
few feet, but not toward the mare, as she should not be disturbed.
The mare will lie down flat, apparently dead, and will remain in this
situation, five, ten, and even sometimes thirty minutes, according to
the severity of the operation she has undergone. Suddenly she will
raise her head, look about the stable, lie down again, and roll three
or four times on her back, but never over her back, which is done for
the purpose of loosening the membrane or lining of the womb spoken of
in Plate I, when she will rise up, go after her offspring, lick and dry
it, after which the membrane and the afterbirth will be discharged.
When the colt is dry, it should be assisted to its mother to obtain
nourishment.

Sometimes the membrane attached to the womb will remain fast, and in
this manner retain the afterbirth. In this case, bleeding from three
to four quarts, and giving following dose of medicine in one pint of
flaxseed tea is recommended, viz:

    1 oz. Laudanum,
    1 oz. sweet Spirits of Niter.

This will correct everything in a few hours. In some extreme cases,
the membrane, the afterbirth and the fluid contained with the foal
remained in the womb after a complete separation from the womb, causing
such a strong inflammation, that some parts had began to mortify.
I have bled copiously, and given one large tablespoonful of fever
medicine, composed of

    4 oz. of Nitre,
    ½  ”  ”  Digitalis,
    ½  ”  ”  Tartar Emetic,

in one pint of Linseed tea, every three hours, and by means of a
syringe, or bladder, with a clean piece of elder tied in the neck, I
have injected into the womb from four to six quarts of Linseed tea,
which caused a copious discharge of bloody matter from the womb,
amounting sometimes to a bucket full. In extraordinary cases, the
purifying organs were overpowered and the mortified blood was carried
through the whole system, and even then the mare recovered to a certain
degree, until in about a week afterwards her hoofs came off, caused by
the mortified blood, and she was accordingly destroyed.

[Illustration: PLATE III.]

The above Engraving represents a false presentation. The two fore feet
are presented, and the head remains behind in the right flank of the
mare. The operator will be able to tell whether they are the front
or hind feet, by examining the knee joints. Now, a bowl containing
two or three quarts of very warm water, with a large tablespoonful of
very fine lard or linseed oil on the surface of the water, should be
at hand. Under no circumstances should a hand or arm be introduced to
the mare, unless first thoroughly warmed and greased, otherwise they
are rank poison to the mare. After the arm is prepared, the fingers
and thumb should be brought to a point, and should be introduced,
following the channel, until the neck of the foal is reached at Fig.
1, when the full right hand should grasp the neck, the left hand being
supported against the mare, when the operator should pull with all his
strength, in order to draw the neck further up, when the hand should
pass down along the neck, still drawing as it passes along, until
reaching Fig. 2, the ear, when he can make good progress, until he
can insert the middle finger in the eye, at which point he is able to
raise the muzzle, Fig. 3, so far, that he may close his hand over it,
and in a minute, all will be right in the operation. But let no one
suppose, that this is accomplished in ten or fifteen minutes. Sometimes
it may, but in many instances, I have labored for an hour, and even
two and a half hours. In some cases, the severe exertion, and the heat
of the mare, caused my arterial circulation to force so powerfully in
my arm, that I was often afraid my veins would burst; in this case I
would withdraw my arm for a minute or two, and then go to work again.
In my entire practice, I have failed but in three cases, that of two
mares and one cow, to accomplish my object. I was often called, where
two, three, and even four men had been summoned before me, owing to the
distance I lived away, and succeeded in every instance where others
failed. I resolved not to fail in any case, but this determination
proved disastrous to myself, inasmuch, as I became subject to
palpitation of the heart, so that I could not follow my business for
more than twelve years.

[Illustration: PLATE IV.]

Of the cases represented in Plate III, I had a large number; of such as
are presented in Plate IV, only a few, of which I will describe only
one. On the 13th of June, 1854, I was called to the premises of Mr.
George Braucher, in Hartley township, Union county.

In this case the hand and arm must be prepared, as already described,
and inserted to the elbow, Fig. 1. A great amount of force is required
to raise the leg, until the knee joint is brought up. The left hand
should then be warmed and greased by an assistant, and introduced,
placing it on the knee-joint; the right hand should then be passed
down, grasp the foot, and turn it backwards, when the left hand
should press inward with great force, and with the right hand bring
up the foot, keeping it turned backwards. When the foot is brought
up, a rope should be attached to the lower jaw of the foal, when an
assistant should take hold of the rope and pull in a slightly downward
direction; in this way the foal will be delivered with the greatest
ease. Sometimes one shoulder will present itself, and the other will
incline a little to the rear. Under such circumstances, too much force
should not be employed; the foal should be turned sometimes from right
to left, and then again from left to right, frequently introducing the
hand, and moving it around the foal. In all cases the membrane or skin
should be kept in its proper position around the foal, as this will
greatly assist the work, and make it one of comparative ease.

In the above case, the foal presented itself in the afternoon of the
12th, and all the knowing men of the neighborhood were summoned, and
all of them labored until night, when they were obliged to give it up
and pronounce it a failure.--The next morning a messenger was sent for
me. I arrived at the spot at half past ten o’clock, in the morning, and
at twelve o’clock noon, I had the object accomplished, and we sat down
to a hearty dinner. In December 1868, the mare was still alive.

[Illustration: PLATE V.]

On the 30th day of April, 1855, when about ready to retire to bed after
a hard day’s drive, two messengers, Mr. B. Cramer, from Middlecreek,
and Mr. Uriah Berger, from Centre township, arrived at my house
together. After some consideration, I concluded to accompany Mr.
Berger, and on arriving, I found a foal, having presented itself as
represented in the preceding Engraving. Before my arrival, three men
had exerted all their strength for an hour or more, to extract it, but
having failed, they left before my arrival.

In this case, the mare is very restless, repeatedly rising up and lying
down again. It will require one man to attend to the head of the mare,
and two men must take hold of the foal, raise it up toward the tail of
the mare, and bear inwards with all their strength, when the operator
must put all his force to one of the hind feet, and push that in at
full arm’s length; the other side must be treated in the same manner.
But let each one bear in mind, when the foal is moved inward, the mare
will have pain and that she will bear towards you, so that sometimes
but little is accomplished.

We labored faithfully from eleven o’clock until one, when I took a
midnight meal and departed for Middlecreek township.

In some cases of the above kind, however, I had accomplished my object
in much less time, than in this one.

[Illustration: PLATE VI.]

On the 5th of May, 1855, I was called to the premises of John Deabler,
in Beaver township, Snyder county, where I found a foal presenting the
tail, as represented in Plate VI. Presentations of this kind occur
but rarely. In this case the operator must prepare his hand and arm as
before stated, and introduce it, taking hold over the stifle-joint at
Fig. 1, then, by a strong effort, pull upward slipping his hand down to
Fig. 2, when he must draw up the knee-joint as far as possible; then
place the left hand on the knee joint, and pass the right hand down to
Fig. 3, the foot, grasp it firmly, and bend it backward, at the same
time pulling upward, and with left the hand bearing inward, when the
foot will yield in a moment. The other side must be dealt with in the
same manner.

[Illustration: PLATE VII.]

The above Engraving represents the foal with the hind feet foremost.
They will generally be projected against the upper part of the
entrance. It is best to extract them in this position, as turning
them is almost impossible. The head will remain so far behind, that it
cannot be reached. By keeping the membrane or skin properly over the
foal, there will be but little difficulty experienced in extracting
it. The foal should sometimes be drawn downward toward the feet of the
mare, and then upwards towards the tail, frequently turning it half way
round, and then back again. The foal will necessarily be dead.

Many cases of this kind will occur in a neighborhood in the course of
twenty years.

[Illustration: PLATE VIII.]

The above Engraving represents a foal which has died from some cause
or other about nine days ago, the mare wanting the proper pains to
deliver it. The foal is now bloated to such an extent, that it is in
a condition to rupture the womb, and the hand can not be passed around
the foal. It is an utter impossibility to extract it in the usual way.
The operator must procure a knife, very straight in the blade, from
twelve to fifteen inches in length, wrap the whole blade in a piece
of muslin, take the point of the knife in his left hand, turning the
edge downward, put his hand in the entrance of the womb and run it
down until he reaches the chest of the foal. He must then introduce
the right hand, grasp the handle, and hold it firm; then with the left
hand he will slip the muslin from the blade, and with the first finger
of the left hand find the spot where the windpipe comes out of the
chest. After the point of the knife is set, the right hand must force
the blade, to its full length if possible, through the Diaphragm, and
then withdraw it. The left hand must retain its hold upon the muslin
during the entire operation, and as the blade is withdrawn from the
foal, it must again be carefully wrapped around the knife, the left
hand seizing the point in the same manner as when it was introduced.
After the arm holding the knife is withdrawn, a very nauseous gas
will escape, and in a short time the front feet may be reached, then
the head, after which the operation will proceed as described in the
foregoing pages.

[Illustration: PLATE IX.]

On the 20th day of May, 1854, I was called to the field of Mr. Sem
Schoch, of New Berlin, Union county, Pa., where I found a mare in the
act of foaling, in which the foal presented the four feet at once.
These cases are of rare occurrence, and it is well for the veterinary
Surgeon, or his life would be a brief one. I never injured myself at
any work to a greater extent, than I did in treating these cases.

Sometimes the hoofs will only protrude from the entrance, leaving the
whole body of the foal in a curved position the head being turned
backward, as described in the foregoing Engraving. The head should be
brought forward, but I always found it impossible in every case of this
description, to accomplish this. A cord must be looped around the hind
legs, to avoid losing them; then the four legs must be put back again
as far as possible, and the foal must be turned, in order to get the
head down and the back up.

If an effort was made to extract the foal as it is presented, the back
would come in below, and the operation would be impossible; but if it
is properly turned, it may be extracted in the same manner, as those
which present only the hind feet, as already described. These cases
require more aid than any others that I have ever treated. Two or three
men should take hold of the mare’s head and neck, to keep her down,
otherwise she will plunge about fearfully. One or two men should assist
the Surgeon, as the effort required for this operation is so great that
one man is soon exhausted.

Two and three hours are often required to accomplish the object in
these cases, but I have succeeded in every one of them in preserving
the mare alive.




THE COW AND CALF.


[Illustration]

The average period of gestation in the cow is 270 days; the shortest
120 days, and the longest 313 days. The calf is placed in the same
position, and in the same side of the cow, as is the foal in the mare.
Mal-presentations of calves are treated in the same manner as those of
the foal, with this advantage, that calves will live much longer than
the foal. I have had cases, where I extracted the calf twenty-four
hours after they were raised, and delivered them alive and sound.

About two weeks before calving, the cow should have, in addition to
her ordinary food, a half pint of rye, evening and morning, as that is
a sure means of taking the cleaning right after the delivery of the
calf. Should this be neglected, she should be slopped with two quarts
of wheat bran and half a teacupful of flaxseed, twice a day. If the
cleaning does not come off on the third day, it should be twisted back
of the cow’s shape, until it becomes a solid cord, when a small knife
enclosed in the hand should be introduced into the womb, and the cord
cut off about fifteen inches from the entrance. This is about all that
will incommode the cow; the other will pass off about the ninth day,
and the cow will be all right. Should the cow have inflammation in the
udder, or any other place, she should be drenched with one lb. of Epsom
Salts. The horns should be examined, and if they are sometimes warm and
then cold again, a hole should be bored through them, about two inches
from the head, and the back of the cow should be fomented with very
strong salt-water; the tail should be slit on both sides about an inch
and a half. In extreme cases a charge should be boiled, and spread on
the loins, consisting of

    1 pint of tar,
    2 oz. Rosin,
    2 oz. Beeswax.

After the charge is spread on, it should be covered with tow or wool.

Calves will sometimes, on account of the cow’s milk being burned, have
a severe Diarrhea. When this is the case they should be drenched with
milk from the cow, containing one large tablespoonful of wheat flour,
and half a teaspoonful of ginger. Should this not be sufficient, opium
may be added to it the size of two grains of wheat.




CLAP OR POX.


[Illustration]

On the 7th day of June, 1853, a Stallion was brought under my
observation, owned by Christian Kerr, of Centre township, then
Union county, which had ten distinct ulcers on his penis, varying
in size from a pea to a dime. These ulcers were accompanied with a
discharge, sometimes bloody, emitting a very disagreeable odor, that
was perceptible at a distance of three or four rods. The attendant of
this horse, noticed these ulcers about five days previous to the time
I was consulted, when the marks were very small. He remarked to me,
that “people declined to allow his horse to cover their mares, stating,
that he was diseased with the pox.” And I actually found this to be the
case. I dressed the horse, and sent him away.

That night I examined all the works veterinary Science that I could
command, and found but a single one that made the least mention of the
disease, but giving neither the cause or treatment of it.

In less than a week, I had over twenty mares to attend, that were
affected by the horse.

I treated the horse and mares according to the best of my judgment,
having first obtained the advice of an eminent human Physician, and I
soon became perfect master of the disease, and saved all but two mares
that were placed under my care. I found, that where the disease had
taken deep root and entered the system, every effort to save the animal
was in vain, and hence, I am satisfied, that where the disease has
been suffered to go unchecked, until it became so deeply rooted as to
vitiate the whole system, it is incurable.


CAUSE.

Mares will sometime get in season early in the spring, when they will
discharge a thin, whitish fluid, resembling bluish milk, of a glutinous
nature, but very clean. If the mare does not become pregnant until the
latter part of May or the beginning of June, this fluid will change
into a mattery state, and will affect the parts in the region of the
womb to such an extent as to cause rawness and inflammation.

A mare, that is in a condition as described above, is very apt to
communicate to the horse covering her, the disease of Gonorrhœa, or
Clap, especially if such horse be permitted to cover from five, twelve
and fifteen mares a day, where another horse, covering only once every
few days will escape unharmed. The reason of this is evident; the penis
of the one covering so many mares, becomes very tender and almost
transparent, so as almost to cause the blood to shine through it.

Another instance in which a horse is apt to become diseased, is, when
he is suffered to cover a mare on the ninth day after she has undergone
the process of foaling. At this period there is still a discharge of
bloody matter, which is very apt to generate clap in an animal of the
opposite sex.


DESCRIPTION OF DISEASE.

Sometimes there will appear on the penis of the Stallion, small white
blotches, on the surface of the skin, from the size of a pin’s head to
that of a grain of wheat, which, on the following day will be double
in size. On the third or fourth day, a pea might be set in the ulcers,
which will emit an offensive odor, and which will spread with great
rapidity.

In the mare blotches will appear on the shape, of a deep red color,
apparently eaten through the surface of the skin, which will enlarge
very rapidly. In a day or two, small tumors will appear, extending from
the shape in a downward direction to the hams. These tumors are of
different sizes, varying from that of a pea to that of a half gallon
crock. They are of a very virulent nature, very often causing a painful
rawness in the entrance to the womb, and extending from one to one and
a half inches.


TREATMENT.

The Stallion should be brought out to a fence, and a mare should be
placed on the other side of the fence, distant about one rod. This will
cause the Stallion to present his penis. A clean crock should be in
readiness, containing two ounces of chloride of lime, and two quarts
of lukewarm water. There should also be on hand a teacup, containing a
stem of nitrate of silver one fourth of an inch in length, which should
be pulverized and dissolved in tablespoonful of water. Another teacup
should be at hand, containing one teaspoonful of tincture of myrrh.

In the crock there should be a sponge the size of an ordinary apple,
with a small stick tied to it. Each of the cups should be provided with
a small pencil, made of soft muslin, about the size of a quill.

The operator should now draw on a pair of leather gloves, and seize the
penis at the point with the left hand, and with the right hand, take
the sponge and wash off the whole penis, from one end to the other.
Then stir up the cup containing the nitrate of silver, take the pencil
and anoint all the spots or marks on the penis; then follow with the
tincture of myrrh.

This operation should be accomplished in less than fifteen minutes, and
the application should be made twice a day.

The mare should be brought out with a blind bridle and collar on, and
tied with the head to a post. The tail should be doubled up and a rope
looped around it, and it should be drawn on the back and the rope tied
to the collar. Then the whole shape should be washed off with the
solution of chloride of lime; then anoint the marks with the nitrate of
silver, and also with the tincture of myrrh. At each operation these
preparations should be introduced about one and half inches within the
shape.

Should any tumors have made their appearance, they must be dressed in
the same manner. If they are large and soft, they should be cut open
and then dressed in the same way.

The foregoing disease has sometimes reappeared in other animals for
four years following my treatment of the above cases but by always
bringing them promptly to my notice, I succeeded invariably in checking
it, so that it never came to the same state as before.




COSTIVENESS IN COLTS.


Sometimes colts which are foaled early in the Spring, owing to the dry
food of the mare, will become so costive, that they will inevitably
die, if not relieved. As a general thing, this costiveness is confined
to the rectum.

To relieve the colt, it should be drenched with half a teacupful of
milk from the mare, which should contain Barbadoes Aloes, the size
of a grain of corn, pulverized, and about an equal amount of ginger,
every six hours; at the same time an injection should be prepared, as
follows: take one quart of wheat bran, and pour on it three quarts of
boiling water. When cold draw off the liquid, add one teacupful of
sweet milk, half a teacupful of molasses. Then by means of a syringe
inject this composition into the rectum. Or, if a syringe cannot be
procured, a bladder with a clean piece of elder tied in the neck of
it may be introduced into the rectum. In a few minutes after, a finger
should be inserted in the rectum, when a small ball of excrement may
be taken out, about the size of a hickory-nut. I have often taken out
twelve and fourteen such balls in the course of twenty minutes. After
this no more medicine is needed.




DIARRHŒA.


Sometimes, the mare being fed too strong on rye chop feed, corn, or
mow-burned oats, or being overworked, the milk gets too strong, causing
a very severe diarrhœa in the colt. This will so much exhaust the colt,
that it will die in a week or two.

TREATMENT.--If occasioned by feeding rye chop, or any of the above
named causes, discontinue the use of them, and substitute good oats and
hay, and give the colt, in half a teacupful of milk from the mare:

    One tablespoonful of wheat flour,
    Opium, the size of two grains of wheat,
    Ginger, half a teaspoonful,

every six hours, until it will sere. Should the colt have pain, which
will be exhibited by lying down and attempting to roll on its back, and
groaning incessantly, the treatment should be changed. Take half a
teacupful of milk from the mare,

    One large teaspoonful of laudanum,
     ”    ”        ”      sweet spirits nitre,
     ”    ”        ”      spirits turpentine,

every three hours, until relief is obtained.

Or, boil very strong mint tea, and give two large tablespoonfuls every
hour until relieved.




FEEBLE COLTS.


Sometimes colts are very feeble when foaled. The cause may be
attributed to the atmosphere, or rather to an epidemic peculiar to some
localities. Many are brought forth so weak, that they are not able to
rise without assistance. A constant dropping of water from the navel
may be perceivable, and the colt becomes so much enfeebled that death
will shortly ensue.


CAUSE.

Sometimes after death, on examination, the liver was found to be
decayed; at other times the kidneys. Sometimes a blister will be found
on one side of the lungs, the size of a hen’s egg, and as clear as
crystal, and filled with a fluid. At other times it is nothing but a
general debility of the system.


TREATMENT.

The colt should be drenched with half a teacupful of milk from the
mare, which should contain,

    ½ teaspoonful of Ginger,
    1 tablespoonful of the best grape wine.

A charge should be spread on the loins which should consist of

    ½ lb. of Tar,
    1 oz. of Rosin,
    1 oz. of Beeswax,

boiled into pitch, the whole covered with tow or wool, and the colt
should be well attended to. They will sometimes recover in a few days.

One came under my observation, that recovered after five weeks, and was
sold for an extra price four years afterwards.




CURE OF WOUNDS.


Horses are sometimes exposed to much danger, and will sometimes receive
the most extraordinary wounds. For the last ten years I have used very
little else, than a solution of the chloride of Lime. It is a sure
means of keeping out cold and inflammation.

First clean the wound from all filthy matter, and bring it into a
healthy state, and in this manner nature will heal it as soon as the
best ointment in the world.

Take chloride of Lime, 2 oz., dissolve it in 2 quarts of lukewarm
water. Then wash out the wound once a day. If it is deep and runs, a
syringe should be at hand in order to force the composition to every
part of it in the inside. Should proud flesh spring up at the entrance
of the wound, pulverized blue vitriol should be applied. In twenty-four
hours after the application, you can rub off from one fourth to one
half inch. Apply it again, until it gets below the surface of the
skin, then apply a little tincture of myrrh.




HINTS ABOUT FATTENING HOGS.


Give your hogs an abundance of charcoal. If any should be foundered,
take 2 ounces of Nitre, (salt-peter,) 1 ounce of Barbadoes Aloes,
pulverize it very fine, and give the one fourth part of it every six
hours.




HINTS ABOUT SHEEP.


Keep your sheep out of clover pasture. Scant blue grass is the pasture
for sheep. Salt once a week. Raise the floor of your fold from four to
six feet above the ground, board it only on three sides, and simply
lath it on the south side, and your sheep will be healthy and without
distemper.

       *       *       *       *       *

ERRATA.--On page eleven, in the fifth line, instead of “entrance,” read
“whole.”

FINIS.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMPLETE TREATISE ON THE MARE AND FOAL AT THE TIME OF DELIVERY, WITH ILLUSTRATIONS. ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


