The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gibson: New Cartoons; A book of Charles Dana Gibson's latest drawings
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Gibson: New Cartoons; A book of Charles Dana Gibson's latest drawings

Author: Charles Dana Gibson

Release date: August 7, 2020 [eBook #62865]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chuck Greif (This file was produced from images
        available at The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIBSON: NEW CARTOONS; A BOOK OF CHARLES DANA GIBSON'S LATEST DRAWINGS ***

                                GIBSON

                             NEW CARTOONS




                                GIBSON

                             NEW CARTOONS

            A BOOK OF CHARLES DANA GIBSON’S LATEST DRAWINGS

                 [Illustration: SOMEWHERE IN AMERICA]

                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                             NEW YORK 1916

Copyright, 1916, by Charles Scribner’s Sons Copyright, 1912, 1913, 1914,
                1915, 1916, by Life Publishing Company

                        Published October, 1916

Thanks are due to the publishers of LIFE for their courtesy in allowing
        the publication of Mr. Gibson’s drawings in this book.

[Illustration: A GIRL IN TIPPERARY

“My heart’s right there.”]

[Illustration: “Three hundred dollars for that gown! Didn’t you get
anything off?”

“All I dared.”]

[Illustration: _He_: Who is that tramping around overhead?

_She_: Oh, that’s only papa. He always gets restless towards morning.]

[Illustration: _Little Sister_: A widow? What’s a widow?

_Big Sister_: A lady what’s had a husband and is goin’ to have
another.]

[Illustration: _He_: It’s perfectly awful the way you continue to flirt
with your old sweethearts. I don’t believe you love me any more. And
yet, before we were married, you told me I was a man of a thousand.

_She_: So you were, my dear, so you were. But I can’t entirely forget
the other nine hundred and ninety-nine.]

[Illustration: _He_: We have had a terrible scrap.

“And I came out ahead.”

“No. I did. You accepted my apology.”]

[Illustration: WHEN GRANDPA THINKS OF HIS MOTHER]

[Illustration: “Aren’t there a couple of young men in there with Clara?”

“No, only one. There isn’t a sound.”]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE LATEST CRAZE]

[Illustration: “That’s a fine dog you have there. What breed is it?”
“Sh! Not so loud! He thinks he’s a bulldog.”]

[Illustration: _Famous Actor_: Oh, yes, I’m married, but I always think
it’s kind o’ tough on a girl that marries one of us travelin’ men.

“Still, it might be worse. I suppose you’re away from home most of the
time.”]

[Illustration: A STORY FROM THE FRONT]

[Illustration: OUT OF WORK]

[Illustration: BOTANY IN THE BOWERY

“Where did you get those flowers, little girl? Off a tree?”

“No, sir.”

“Off a bush?”

“No, sir.”

“Where?”

“Off a lady.”]

[Illustration: “Between me an’ you, Uncle Jasper, don’t you get awful
tired of doin’ what you’re told? Don’t be scared to answer. I won’t give
you away to Aunt Jane.”]

[Illustration: EVERYMAN TO HIS TASTE]

[Illustration: HER DANCE]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: ADVICE TO THE MENTALLY FEEBLE

Keep out of politics.]

[Illustration: ADVICE TO THE MENTALLY FEEBLE

Keep the mouth closed.]

[Illustration: ADVICE TO THE MENTALLY FEEBLE

Never by any chance stay at home.]

[Illustration: ADVICE TO THE MENTALLY FEEBLE

By all means marry for a home.]

[Illustration: ADVICE TO THE MENTALLY FEEBLE

Go back to the stable as soon as possible.]

[Illustration: “Arthur says when he is at your house he acts just like
one of the family.” “Yes, he seems to be just as much afraid of my wife
as I am.”]

[Illustration: “I had a poet on one side and a millionaire on the
other.”

“What did you talk about?”

“I talked to the poet about money and to the millionaire about the
intellectual life.”]

[Illustration: _Skimpy Mistress_ (_scenting unaccustomed delights_):
Sarah, what is that I smell?

_Undernourished Maid of all Work_: I think it must come in from next
door.]

[Illustration: “You don’t mean to say, Estelle, that you are tired of
settlement work?”

“But, Auntie, dear, poor people are so monotonous.”]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: CHRISTMAS EVE VISITORS]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

Trying to be appreciative while the author of the verses looks over your
shoulder.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

His fiancée sees Captain von Hoffenfeffer in civilian clothes for the
first time.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

When your mother shows your best girl the door.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

When your rich aunt arrives unexpectedly and finds you haven’t hung the
portrait she sent you at Christmas.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

Dad is introduced to the man of her choice--“the nicest, sweetest thing
in all the world.”]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

Which shall be her sphere?]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

The Rev. ---- reads his latest comedy to his niece.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

_Strong-minded Lady_ (_on meeting the bride and groom_): I trust you
will be as happy as we have been.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _She_: Are you going to volunteer?

_He_: If yes, no. If no, yes.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

The one night a week that he dines at home.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

A susceptible young man trying to make up his mind which way to turn]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

Something wrong somewhere--time 8.55 and still waiting for dinner to be
announced.]

[Illustration: TRAGIC MOMENTS

The first stormy night in the cottage you have rented for the summer.]

[Illustration: THE LATEST THINGS IN MEN’S STYLES]

[Illustration: THE PLUMP ONE COMPLAINS THAT THE MODERN FASHIONS MAKE ALL
WOMEN TOO MUCH ALIKE]

[Illustration: THE REASON DINNER WAS LATE]

[Illustration: AMONG THOSE NOT INVITED]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: PRESENT PLIGHT OF THE EUROPEAN DÉBUTANTE

]

[Illustration: STUDIES IN EXPRESSION

Waiting for the flashlight.]

[Illustration: STUDIES IN EXPRESSION

Making it a jack pot.]

[Illustration: STUDIES IN EXPRESSION

Reading the play.]

[Illustration: TEMPTATION

Just before it’s too late.]

[Illustration: THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF HER ENGAGEMENT]

[Illustration: SEVENTH INNING--EVERYBODY UP]

[Illustration: MEETING HER SISTER’S CITY FRIENDS]

[Illustration: LOOKING OVER HIS LATEST INVESTMENT]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: A DOG’S LIFE]

[Illustration: KEEPING NEUTRAL]

[Illustration: ANOTHER CASE OF TRYING TO KEEP NEUTRAL]

[Illustration: _Husband_: Do you think you will be able to keep within
your allowance this month?

“I’m afraid so.”]

[Illustration: THE WONDERS OF NATURE

_Fond Grandparent_: I was exactly like him at his age.]

[Illustration: MOBILIZING FOR THE SUMMER CAMPAIGN]

[Illustration: OUR UNCHARTED COAST

Very dangerous.]

[Illustration: ALL SORTS OF PUPS]

[Illustration: EVEN THE FISH HAVE FEELINGS]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: “LADIES AND GENTLEMEN”]

[Illustration: “I don’t think married life is ever happy, anyway.”

“Then, why don’t you divorce your husband?”

“I’d rather quarrel with him than with strangers.”]

[Illustration: _Editor_: Have you ever written any editorials?

_College Graduate_: No, sir; but I think I might train my mind down to
it.]

[Illustration: DO WOMEN PROPOSE?

Mr. Wooden always wanted a tall, serious wife, while his friend Chubb
intended to marry a cheery little woman.]

[Illustration: THE THIRD GENERATION]

[Illustration: HOUSEHOLD DECORATION

Mantel ornaments for domestic cheer.]

[Illustration: “Can you come to the jeweler’s with me to-morrow,
dearest? I’d like you to choose the ring yourself.”

“In that case perhaps you’d better save up a little longer, darling.”]

[Illustration: A SAVING GRACE

“Louise, I really cannot permit you to read novels on Sunday.”

“But, Grandmamma, this novel is all right; it tells about a girl who was
engaged to three Episcopal clergymen, all at once.”]

[Illustration: A TRAGIC MOMENT FOR SMYTH (WHO MARRIED FOR A HOME)

Mrs. S. (who has the money) objects to the size of his tailor’s bill.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: ALSO BRAVE

An outsider at one of Mrs. Catchem’s evenings.]

[Illustration: ALSO BRAVE

The parson’s wife.]

[Illustration: IN THE CLOUDS]

[Illustration: “Why aren’t you ready, Isabel? You know very well the
opera begins at eight-fifteen.”

“Oh! Gracious! I forgot all about it. I’ve been so busy writing this
article on preparedness.”]

[Illustration: FREDERICK ENJOYS THE FLOWER SHOW IN OUR VILLAGE]

[Illustration: WHEN THEY GET THEIR RIGHTS

“It’s only fair to warn you that my son has never had a father’s care
and doesn’t know the first thing about housekeeping.”]

[Illustration: WHEN WOMEN VOTE

Mrs. Jones officially notified of her election as sheriff.]

[Illustration: _He_: That sofa must have been made for two.

_She_: It’s hardly short enough for that.]

[Illustration: LEAP YEAR

_He_: You never compliment me any more on my appearance.

_She_: Oh, charming! Charming! Charming!]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GIBSON: NEW CARTOONS; A BOOK OF CHARLES DANA GIBSON'S LATEST DRAWINGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


