The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Journal of Electricity, Power and Gas, Volume XX, No. 18, May 2, 1908
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Journal of Electricity, Power and Gas, Volume XX, No. 18, May 2, 1908

Author: Various

Editor: A. H. Halloran

Release date: October 30, 2018 [eBook #58196]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
        generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF ELECTRICITY, POWER AND GAS, VOLUME XX, NO. 18, MAY 2, 1908 ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)










                                   THE

                  Journal of Electricity, Power and Gas

   Devoted to the Conversion, Transmission and Distribution of Energy.

      VOLUME XX.      SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., MAY 2, 1908      No. 18




LIGHTING SYSTEM OF THE ORCUTT OIL FIELDS.

By CLEM A. COPELAND.

Consulting Engineer, Los Angeles, Cal.


The large and deep-lying oil-sand lakes and subterranean gas works,
commencing with the southern rim of the Santa Maria Valley and stretching
away for a dozen miles southward toward Santa Barbara, contribute some
14,600,000 barrels of high gravity refining and fuel oil to California’s
annual production of 40,000,000 barrels.

[Illustration: WEST FRAME OF 2600 FT. SPAN. POWER-HOUSE IN BACKGROUND.]

With the assistance of two eight-inch pipe lines 32 miles to Port
Harford, a similar line 48 miles across the Isthmus of Panama, and a
goodly fleet of vessels, the Union Oil Company scatters this oil from
Seattle to San Diego, and from New York to Japan. Chile also has a share
for the working of its nitre beds and its railways.

The little towns of Santa Maria and Orcutt receive with open pipes a
tithe of the gas which nature has here stored, and which would otherwise
escape the many safety valves, while the steam rig engines have often
been run with direct gas pressure from the wells.

This land of gas and gushers is difficult of control, and is always ready
to pop off at from 100 to 400 pounds pressure through the many 3,000-foot
tubes which puncture its depths. When a new gusher is brought in, it
sprays the adjacent hills with a glistening shadow of petroleum and is no
respecter of persons or property. One new and frisky fury flowed 12,000
barrels per day, and delivered 4,000,000 cubic feet of gas every 24 hours
for four months, gradually dropping to a production of 7,000 barrels,
which it maintained for nearly a year, finally diminishing to 3,500, and
now, after three and a third years, is still producing 250 barrels per
day, having delivered during this time 3,000,000 barrels of petroleum,
and enough gas to last San Francisco for three years. This is, with
perhaps one exception, the most remarkable well in the history of oil
industry, and is widely known as “Hartwell No. 1.”

The district contains two groups of wells, one contiguous to Orcutt,
and the other near Lompoc. Danger from fire due to the excessive gas
pressure of the Orcutt fields is exceedingly great, as evidenced by the
burning of four “rigs” in the first two years of its history, during
which time there were fifteen wells brought into production. The cost of
these “rigs” exceeded the cost of the lighting plant, which is described
in these notes, and no fires have since occurred in the sixty wells now
producing. The advisability of the plant is therefore quite patent.

[Illustration: MAP OF ORCUTT OIL FIELDS ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.]

The lighting system employed in the Orcutt oil fields is perhaps
only interesting in illustrating how the methods employed in large
undertakings may be used to great advantage in the smaller enterprises to
effect a large saving and to simplify conventional methods. The smaller
undertakings often afford opportunities of saving a larger percentage in
cost and operation in connection with the larger ones. In the present
instance, an economy of $9,000 was made in a system which would have cost
$30,000 if constructed along conventional lines.

As may be seen from some of the views in these notes, the country covered
by the system is very hilly and stony, hard sandstone being everywhere
prominent. Trees would have interfered considerably over perhaps a third
of the line with ordinary construction, and being oak, it would have cost
heavily to eliminate them. Although the winters in this section are very
bleak and windy, no snow has ever fallen. The attached map shows the
wells, which are unusually far apart and scattered over some 5,000 acres
of land.

[Illustration: FRAME BETWEEN 1500 AND 1600 FT. SPAN.]

Long span work, employing copper cables, and using the oil-well derricks
for support, seemed well to meet these and all other conditions in the
most economical fashion. The adoption of long span work effected a large
saving in the length of line and wire needed to cover the territory,
since air-line routes could be covered in all cases across country,
without any care being taken to lay out a pole line which would conform
to some general inflexible plan. Moreover, much vertical distance was
saved in not having to follow the contour of the country. Incidentally
the long span work makes the installation of new pieces of line very easy
and simple, and no large amount of material need be kept on hand for
expansion purposes.

Where conditions are rapidly changing, as in the present instance,
existing lines having to be moved because of the abandonment of wells
or re-arrangement as new wells come in amongst the old ones, are easily
changed, with but little loss of labor and material. The derricks, 80
feet in height, make ideal supports for long-span construction, and steel
frames, heavy enough for the largest size of wire, eventually were made
of “scrap” pipe set in cement. Where the derricks were not available,
redwood “dead-men” were also used between derricks which were near
together, but on opposite sides of rises or hills. The present system
of distribution is 72,550 feet, or 13.75 miles, in length, and consists
of 70 derricks, 9 frames, and 10 “dead-men,” making the average span
about 800 feet. The seven-strand bare copper cables used in this work
were furnished under rigid specifications previously described in the
“Journal,” by the Standard Underground Cable Company. One will observe
from the map and photos that there are many spans 1,500 feet in length,
one span of 2,000 feet between derricks and one 2,600 feet from one frame
to another. The sags allowed correspond to 60 feet on a 2,000-foot span,
and the cables were very small for such work, No. 6 being used for the
greatest lengths, which occurs as a neutral on the longest spans. The
sizes used are Nos. 2, 4, and 6.

As the cables were suspended high above the ground and good construction
was relied upon for safety from breakage, they were used without
insulation, and a large saving was thus effected. “Goose-egg” strain
insulators, first designed by the writer several years ago, are used to
insulate the cables. Copper sleeves were used to splice the cables and to
loop them to the insulators.

It is of considerable interest to observe the action of these light
cables in a high wind, for even in the most gusty storms there is no
whipping action. In the longer spans, the cables hang absolutely parallel
and sway in a most deliberate manner from 12 to 25 feet out of line.

[Illustration: HARTWELL NO. ONE.]

[Illustration: DETAIL OF DERRICK CONSTRUCTION.]

Inasmuch as fuel economy is of little importance, since either waste
gas or oil can be used, a large drop in the distributing system is
permissible, and a radius of three or four miles from the power-house
can be economically attained by the use of 210 to 250 volt lamps on the
three-wire direct-current system. At present the maximum distance is 255
miles, and four voltages of lamps are employed. The derricks are wired on
the two-wire system with No. 14 T. B. W. P. medium, hard-drawn wire, care
being taken to keep all wires on the outside of derrick house wherever
possible. Although the wires and insulators have been in some cases
completely sprayed and saturated with oil from the gushers, no troubles
of insulation have been experienced.

At the time this work was started, there was a small plant on the Pinal
Oil Company’s property near by, where keyed sockets were used until one
of the drillers was injured by a gas explosion caused by turning off
one of the lights. This, of course, suggested the care necessary to
guard against such accidents. In the present installation, double-pole
fuses were constructed for each derrick and tank house, by using two
weatherproof sockets and Edison plug fuses, all inclosed in a gauze
cylinder like a Davy mine lamp. Switches for tank house and derricks
were also inclosed in gauze. In wiring the derricks, sleeves were used
for splicing, so that in the whole system no solder nor torch was used.
Specially designed heavy wire lamp guards and portables, with wires
inclosed in cotton-covered garden hose, are other features of the derrick
wiring. When drilling is commenced, the derrick is wired for eleven
lights. Tank houses, some fifteen or twenty in number, are wired with a
light over each tank.

[Illustration: POWER-HOUSE.]

The power-house is of only passing interest, being designed for
reliability and minimum first cost, and with the idea of transplanting
it to some new location should future conditions dictate. The view shows
two 10×10 Shepherd engines, clutched to either end of a shaft, from which
two 45-kilowatt, 250-volt, direct-current Westinghouse generators are
belted. In case of accident to one generator, a switch on the switchboard
converts the 3-wire to a 2-wire system, using the two outside wires as
one, and the neutral as the return conductor. Three 48×14 fire-tube
boilers supply steam at 125 pounds pressure. The power-house is in a
perennially cool location on a hill crest, so that it could be made small
and cozy.

The system has been in uninterrupted and satisfactory operation for
two years. The only trouble during the time was caused by one wire of
one span breaking, due to an imperfection in splicing. The section has
long-continued and severe winds, much rain and cold weather, but two
winters have developed no imperfections. Although the lights burn all
night, no interruption has been experienced. Reliability is important,
since, if the lights failed, there would be a temptation to light candles
or lanterns at a critical time.

The system was designed and supervised by Mr. Copeland, of Messrs. Clem.
Copeland and F. R. Schanck, consulting engineers for the Union Oil
Company. Mr. C. W. Crawley, who is at present electrical superintendent,
was foreman of construction.




ALCOHOL vs. GASOLINE FOR POWER.


The Technologic Branch of the United States Geological Survey, under the
direction of Mr. J. A. Holmes, has recently completed an elaborate series
of tests on the relative value of gasoline and alcohol as producers of
power. The tests, over two thousand in number, probably represent the
most complete and exact investigation of the kind that has been made,
either in this country or abroad, and includes much original research
work.

Correspondingly well-designed alcohol and gasoline engines when running
under the most advantageous conditions for each, will consume equal
volumes of the fuel for which they are designed. This statement is based
on the results of many tests made under the most favorable practical
conditions that could be obtained for the size and type of engines
and fuel used. An average of the minimum fuel consumption values thus
obtained, gives a like figure of eight-tenths (.8) of a pint per hour per
brake horsepower for gasoline and alcohol.

Considering that the heat value of a gallon of the denatured alcohol is
only a little over six-tenths (.6) that of a gallon of the gasoline,
this result of equal fuel consumption by volume for gasoline and
alcohol engines probably represents the best comparative value that can
be obtained for alcohol at the present time, as is also indicated by
continental practice. Though the possibility of obtaining this condition
in practice here has been thoroughly demonstrated at the Government
Fuel-testing Plant, it yet remains with the engine manufacturers to make
the “equal fuel consumption by volume” a commercial basis of comparison.

The gasoline engines that were used in these tests are representative
of the standard American stationary-engine types, rating at 10 to 15
horsepower, at speeds of from 250 to 300 revolutions per minute, while
the alcohol engines were of similar construction and identical in size
with the gasoline engines.

The air was not preheated for the above tests on alcohol and gasoline,
and the engines were equipped with the ordinary types of constant level
suction lift and constant level pressure spray carburetters. Many special
tests with air preheated to various temperatures up to 250° Fahrenheit,
and tests with special carburetters were made, but no beneficial effects
traceable to better carburation were found when the engines were handled
under the special test conditions, including constant speed and best load.

The commercial completely denatured alcohol referred to is 100 parts
ethyl alcohol plus 10 parts methyl alcohol plus one-half of one part
benzol, and corresponds very closely to 94 per cent by volume or 91 per
cent by weight ethyl alcohol (grain alcohol).

No detrimental effects on the cylinder walls and valves of the engines
were found from the use of the above denatured alcohol.

The lowest consumption values were obtained with the highest compression
that it was found practical to use; which compression for the denatured
alcohol ranged from 150 to 180 pounds per square inch above atmosphere.

Eighty per cent alcohol (alcohol and water) for use in engines of the
present types would have to sell for at least 15 per cent less per
gallon than the denatured alcohol, in order to compete with it. The
minimum consumption values in gallons per hour per brake horsepower for
80 per cent alcohol is approximately 17.5 per cent greater than for the
denatured alcohol used, or for gasoline. A series of tests made with
alcohol of various percentages by volume ranging from 94 per cent to 50
per cent, showed that the minimum consumption values in gallons per hour
per brake horsepower increased a little more rapidly than the alcohol
decreased in percentage of pure alcohol. That is, the thermal efficiency
decreased with the decrease in percentage of pure alcohol. This decrease
in thermal efficiency or increase in consumption referred to pure alcohol
is, however, comparatively slight from 100 per cent alcohol down to about
80 per cent alcohol. Within these limits it may be neglected in making
the calculations necessary to compare the minimum consumption values for
tests with different percentages of alcohol.

The nearer the alcohol is to pure, the greater the maximum horsepower
of the engine. The per cent reduction in maximum horsepower for 80 per
cent alcohol as compared with that for denatured alcohol used, was less
than one per cent, but the starting and regulating difficulties are
appreciably increased.

With suitable compression, mixtures of gasoline and alcohol vapors
(double carburetters) gave thermal efficiencies ranging between that for
gasoline (maximum 22.2 per cent) and that for alcohol (maximum 34.6 per
cent) but in no case were they higher than that for alcohol. The above
thermal efficiencies are calculated from the brake horsepower and the low
calorific value of the fuel, which for the gasoline was 19,100 British
thermal units per pound, and for the denatured alcohol was 10,500 British
thermal units per pound.

As has been previously published, alcohol can be used with more or
less satisfaction in stationary and marine gasoline engines and these
gasoline engines will use from one and one-half to twice as much alcohol
as gasoline when operating under the same conditions. The possibilities,
however, of altering the ordinary gasoline engines as required to obtain
the best economies with alcohol are very limited; for the amount that the
compression can be raised without entirely redesigning the cylinder head
and valve arrangement is ordinarily not sufficient, nor are the gasoline
engines usually built heavy enough to stand the maximum explosive
pressures, which often reach six and seven hundred pounds per square
inch. With the increase in weight for the same-sized engine designed to
use alcohol instead of gasoline, comes an increase in maximum horsepower
of a little over thirty-five per cent (35%), so that its weight per
horsepower need not be greater than that of the gasoline engine, and
probably will be less.

The work was taken up to investigate the characteristic action of fuels
used in internal combustion engines with a detailed study of the action
of each fuel (gasoline and alcohol) as governed by the many variable
conditions of engine manipulation, design and equipment. These variables
were isolated, so far as possible; their separate and combined effects
were determined; worked out under practical operating conditions; and
led up to the conditions required for minimum fuel consumption. The
results show the saving that can be obtained over conditions for maximum
consumption, and also establish a definite basis of comparison under
conditions most favorable to each fuel. This latter is a point of much
commercial interest, and a study of the comparative action of gasoline
and alcohol may be of great service in solving some of the general
internal-combustion-engine problems where other than liquid fuels are
used.

A large number of fundamental tests were necessary in order to clearly
define conditions and interpret results. In a way they follow the work
conducted by the Department of Agriculture, supplementing to a certain
extent, but not duplicating bulletin 191, which gives much data of
general value.

Many of the tests of internal-combustion engines have been made, but
most of them, especially in this country, were by private concerns,
for a specified purpose, and the results are not generally available.
Furthermore, as is generally recognized by those familiar with gas, and
especially gasoline-engine operation, the conditions influencing engine
performance are so numerous and varied as to make the value of offhand
comparison very limited and oftentimes misleading, exact comparisons only
being possible under identical conditions or with reference to the actual
known differences in all conditions that influence the results.




ELECTRICAL CODE REVISIONS.


At the recent meeting of the Underwriters’ National Electric Association
it was decided that Cooper Hewitt lamps must have a cut-out for each
lamp or series, except when contained in a single frame and lighted
by a single operation, in which case not more than five lamps shall
be dependent on a single cut-out. The regulators must be enclosed
in non-combustible cases, and where subject to flyings of lint or
combustible material, all openings through the casings must be protected
by a fine wire gauze. Moore electric light tubes must be installed so
as to be free from liability to mechanical injury or of contact with
inflammable material. The high-potential coils and regulating apparatus
must be installed in an approved steel cabinet, which shall be ventilated
in such a manner as to prevent the escape of flame or sparks in case of
burn-out. The apparatus in this box must be mounted on slate, and the
enclosing case positively grounded. The supply conductors must comply
with the rules governing low-potential systems where such wires do not
carry current having a potential of over 300 volts.

Rule 8, section _d_, was amended to apply to auto-starters only, and
a new section was added to rule 60 governing the details of rheostat
construction. New rules regarding low-potential transformers follow: Oil
transformers must not be placed inside of any building except central
stations and sub-stations, unless by special permission of the inspection
department. Air-cooled transformers must not be placed inside of any
building excepting central stations and sub-stations, unless the highest
voltage of either primary or secondary does not exceed 550 volts, and
must be so mounted that the case shall be one foot from combustible
material or separated therefrom by non-combustible, non-absorptive,
insulating material, such as slate or marble. Where transformers are
placed at a lesser distance, a slab of slate or marble somewhat larger
than the transformer must be used, and where the transformer is mounted
on a side wall, the slate or marble must be secured independent of
the transformer supports, the transformer being supported by bolts
countersunk at least one-eighth inch below the surface of the back of the
slab and filled.

For wiring electric cranes the following rules were adopted: All wires
except bare collector wires, those between resistances and contact
plates of rheostats and those subjected to severe external heat, must
be approved, rubber-covered and not smaller in size than No. 12 B. & S.
Wires between resistances and contact plates of rheostats must conform
to No. 4-c, unless the wires are exposed to moisture, in which case
the insulation must also be rubber. Wires subjected to severe external
heat must have approved slow-burning insulation. All wires, excepting
collector wires and those run in metal conduit or armored cable, must be
supported by knobs or cleats which separate them at least one inch from
the surface wired over, but in dry places where space is limited and the
distance between wires as required by Rule 24-h cannot be obtained, each
wire must be separately encased in approved flexible tubing securely
fastened in place. Collector wires must be supported by approved
insulators so mounted that even with the extreme movement permitted the
wires will be separated at all times at least one and one-half inches
from the surface wired over. Collector wires must be held at the ends by
approved strain insulators.

Where the wires are arranged in a horizontal plane above the crane,
they must be supported at least every twenty feet if practicable, and
separated at least six inches, but if longer spans are necessary, the
distance between wires must be increased proportionately, the span in
no case to exceed forty feet. If not arranged in a horizontal plane,
they must be carried along the runways and must be rigidly and securely
attached to their insulating supports at least every twenty feet, and
if not arranged in a vertical plane, must be separated at least eight
inches.

Where bridge collector wires are over eighty feet long, insulating
supports on which the wires may loosely lie must be provided at least
every fifty feet. Bridge collector wires must be kept at least two and
one-half inches apart, but a greater spacing should be used whenever
it may be obtained. Collector wires must not be smaller in size than
specified in the following table for the various spans:

    Distance between     Size wire
     rigid supports.     required.
          Feet.           B. & S.
         0 to 30             6
        31 to 60             4
         Over 60             2

Collectors must be so designed that sparking will be reduced to a minimum
between them and collector wires. The main collector wires must be
protected by a cut-out and the circuit controlled by a switch, cut-out
and switch to be so located as to be easy of access from the floor.
Cranes operated from cabs must have a cut-out and switch connected into
the leads from the main collector wires and so located in the cab as to
be readily accessible to the operator. Where there is more than one motor
on a single crane, each motor lead must be protected by a cut-out located
in the cab if there is one.

Controllers must be installed according to No. 4, except that if the
crane is located outdoors the wires between resistances and contact
plates of rheostats may be rubber-covered or bare or slow-burning if
properly supported. If the crane operates over readily combustible
material, the resistances must be placed in a fire-resisting enclosure;
or, if located in a cab, the cab must be constructed of non-combustible
material and sides provided which enclose the cab from its floor to a
height at least six inches above the top of the resistance.

The motor frames, the entire frame of the crane and the tracks must be
permanently and effectively grounded.

A number of recommendations were made calling for conductive coatings on
cables, outlet boxes and fittings in order to secure better electrical
contact at all points throughout systems in which they are used.

The following suggested changes in the rules were adopted: The fine print
note under rule 2, section a, was amended to read as follows: “Wires from
generator to switchboard may, however, be placed in conduit, provided
that proper precautions are taken to protect them against moisture and
mechanical injury. If lead-covered cable is used no further protection
against moisture will be required, etc.” Section c of the same rule
was amended by inserting the words, “where not in conduit,” after the
first word. The last sentence of the fine print note in rule 12, section
g, was amended to read: “The outer or weather end of conduit is to be
provided with approved devices having wires separated and bushed through
porcelain.”

A number of changes were made in rule 24. Section a, with fine-print
note, was stricken from the Code; section o was amended by making the
first recommendation “a turn of 90 deg., etc.”; section p was amended so
as to restrict the number of different circuits in the same conduit to
four two-wire or three three-wire; section x was changed by substituting
the word _or_ after the word _fastenings_ for _of_. Rule 24A was also
changed somewhat. Section d was amended so as not to prohibit the
installation of armored cable without the lead covering in buildings
of fireproof construction in locations free from moisture; the word
“underground” was omitted from the first line of the fine-print note
under section a. A new section was added as follows: “All bends must
be so made that the armor of the cable will not be injured. The radius
of the curve of the inner edge of any bend not to be less than one and
one-half inches.”

Rule 28, section e, was amended so as to exclude flexible cord from
show cases as well as show windows; the fine-print note under section g
was omitted. A number of minor changes were made in the rules governing
the wiring of theaters, principally in inserting the words, “or armored
cable,” so as to permit the use of the latter as an alternative to rigid
conduit. The other changes have to do with the details of construction,
fitting, etc. Among the miscellaneous suggestions adopted were the
following: All self-fastening knobs, cleats and supports must be secured
by suitable screws; wires in molding must be in continuous lengths from
outlet to outlet or from fitting to fitting; sockets or rosettes cannot
be used to dead-end a circuit; soap-stone can be used as an alternative
for slate or marble; and ends of flexible wire need not be soldered
before insertion under binding posts, as called for in rule 14, section c.




Approved Electrical Devices

    This department from time to time will contain an illustrated
    description of all fittings approved by the Underwriters’
    National Electric Association.


CONDUIT BOX, FLOOR OUTLET.

Iron box, brass floor plate and nozzle. Cat. No. 100. Approved March 20,
1908. Manufactured by

=Arthur Frantzen Co., 92 W. Van Buren St., Chicago, Ill.=


GROUND CLAMPS.

“Neco” and “Griptite” clamps for rigid conduit, in sizes for ½-inch
to 3-inch pipe. ”Flexclamp” for Greenfield flexible steel conduits
or armored cable, sizes A to E, inclusive. Approved March 20, 1908.
Manufactured by

=Novelty Electric Co., 50-54 North Fourth St., Philadelphia, Pa.=


PANELBOARDS.

Cuthbert Panelboards, 125, 125-250, and 250 V., two and three wire, with
double pole knife or snap switches and link, Edison plug or cartridge
inclosed fuses. Approved March 20, 1908. Manufactured by

=Cuthbert Electrical Manufacturing Co., 105-109 S. Clinton St., Chicago,
Ill.=


RECEPTACLES FOR ATTACHMENT PLUGS.

Surface receptacles with pull-off attachment plugs. Two-wire, Cat. No.
45,395, 25 A, 125 V; three-wire, Cat. No. 45,490, 25 A, 125-250 V. (For
use with approved sub-base only.) Approved March 20, 1908. Manufactured by

=General Electric Co., Schenectady, N. Y.=


SWITCHES, KNIFE.

Cuthbert Panelboard Switches, 15 A, 125 V, and 25 A, 250 V. Approved
March 20, 1908. Manufactured by

=Cuthbert Electrical Manufacturing Co., 105-109 S. Clinton St., Chicago,
Ill.=


CONDUIT BOXES.

“Unilets” cast-iron outlet boxes with threaded openings for ½ to 3-inch
rigid conduit. With covers of stamped steel or porcelain, or with
porcelain bushings. Types 1-12 and 14. Approved April 13, 1908, for
exposed work only. Manufactured by

=Appleton Electric Co., 224 Washington St., Chicago, Ill.=


FIXTURES.

“Oamco” show window reflector. Cat. Nos. 655, 655A, 655B, 655C. A metal
trough lined with glass reflectors and fitted with approved lamp sockets
carried on cast-iron arms bolted to iron pipe containing wiring. Approved
April 13, 1908. Manufactured by

=Overbaugh & Ayres Mfg. Co., 232 South Clinton St., Chicago, Ill.=


LAMP ADJUSTERS.

“Gem” lamp Adjusters, styles A and B. A pulley-wheel mounted in iron
bracket, wheel controlled by locking mechanism so as to permit the
adjustment of a pendant lamp hung from a porcelain knob secured to
device. Suitable for use with flexible pendant cord. Approved April 13,
1908. Manufactured by

=Gem Mfg. Co., 467 Eleventh Ave., Milwaukee, Wis.=


MISCELLANEOUS.

Mercury Arc Rectifiers for converting alternating to direct currents;
outfits supplied for A. C. circuits of 110-220 and 330 volts with D. C.
current capacities up to and including 50 Amps. (For Telephone Battery
Service this apparatus may include G. E. Type A Transformer of unit
ratio, to be inserted as insulation between A. C. circuit grounded
neutral and ground return of the telephone system.) Compensating
reactance case must be mounted on base of slate or over non-combustible
insulating material when installed on floor or wall of combustible
material. Approved April 13, 1908. Manufactured by

=General Electric Co., Schenectady, N. Y.=

M. S. Cord Grip. A fibre disc for use in socket and attachment plug caps,
rosettes and similar devices, replacing knot in flexible pendant cord.
Approved April 13, 1908. Manufactured by

=Marshall Electric Mfg. Co., 301 Congress St., Boston, Mass.=


RECEPTACLES FOR ATTACHMENT PLUG.

Surface receptacles, with pull-off attachment plug. Three-wire, Cat. No.
45,490, 25 A., 125-250 V., for use only with approved sub-base. Two-wire,
Cat. No. 45,395, 25 A., 125 V. Approved April 6, 1908. Manufactured by

=General Electric Co., Schenectady, N. Y.=

Surface Receptacles, 20 A., 25 V. Cleat concealed and moulding types,
Cat. Nos. 5,567 to 5,569, inclusive. Flush Receptacle, 20 A., 250 V.,
Cat. No. 5,551. Approved April 13, 1908. Manufactured by

=Harvey Hubbell, Inc., 35 Organ St., Bridgeport, Conn.=

Lang stage receptacle and plug, 125 and 250 V. Base of single piece of
hard porcelain or alberene stone. Hardwood plug for stage cable. For use
in suitable iron or steel box. Approved April 13, 1908. Manufactured by

=J. Lang Electric Co., 116 N. Lincoln St., Chicago, Ill.=

Russell stage pocket and plug, Cat. No. 13, 50 A., 125 V. Receptacle
with porcelain base mounted in suitable cast-iron box. Plug of red fibre
provided with fibre clamp replacing knot in cord. Approved April 13,
1908. Manufactured by

=Russell & Stoll Co., 48 Cliff St., New York, N. Y.=


RECEPTACLES, STANDARD.

Bryant Receptacles, 3 A., 250 V., Sign, Cat. Nos. 1,700 and 46,749.
Cleat Cat. Nos. 9,402, 9,403, 921, 1,011, 1,123, 50,715, 11,221, 28,795,
58,949, 58,300, 58,301. Concealed, Cat. Nos. 50,744, also 9,447, fusible
2 A., 125 V. Moulding, Cat. Nos. 42,453, 58,302 and 58,950. Conduit box.
Cat. Nos. 9,514 and 9,397. Rosette receptacles, cleat and concealed
types, fusible, 2 A., 125 V., Cat. Nos. 9,434, 9,436, 9,438, 9,404, 9,405
and 9,406. Approved April 2, 1908. Manufactured by

=Bryant Electric Co., Bridgeport, Conn.=

Porcelain shell, keyless, 3 A., 250 V. Cleat type, Cat. Nos. 28,794,
28,795 and 11,221. Concealed type, Nos. 50,744 and 50,717. Conduit boxes,
Nos. 9,397, 40,537, 49,354 and 9,514. Sign receptacle, No. 46,627. Wall
sockets, brass shell, key, 50 C. P., keyless. 3 A., 250 V. Concealed
base, Nos. 9,184, 27,743, 29,404, 9,185, 27,743 and 29,405. Angle base,
Nos. 50,753, 28,721, 29,406, 50,755. 28,722 and 29,407. Approved April
13, 1908. Manufactured by

=General Electric Co., Schenectady, N. Y.=




    THE JOURNAL OF ELECTRICITY,
    POWER AND GAS

    Published Weekly by
    THE TECHNICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY
    111 New Montgomery St., San Francisco, California

    E. B. STRONG, President and Gen’l Manager
    A. H. HALLORAN, Secy. and Managing Editor

    Directors:

    R. J. DAVIS
    A. M. HUNT
    E. M. SCRIBNER
    C. L. CORY
    E. B. STRONG

    Yearly subscription, $2.50. Single copies, 10 cts. Back numbers
    prior to the current month, 25 cts. Canadian subscription $3.50.

    Foreign subscription, $4.00.

    Subscriptions cannot be begun with back numbers.

    Manuscripts submitted must be accompanied by postage to insure
    return.

    Address all communications and make all remittances payable to
    The Technical Publishing Company.

    Entered as second-class matter at the San Francisco Post Office
    as “The Electrical Journal,” July, 1895.

    Entry changed to “The Journal of Electricity,” September, 1895.

    Entry changed to “The Journal of Electricity, Power and Gas,”
    August 15, 1899.

    Entry changed May 1, 1906, to “The Journal of Electricity,
    Power and Gas,” Weekly.

    VOL. XX      MAY 2, 1908      No. 18




EDITORIAL.


[Sidenote: MANUFACTURING OPPORTUNITY.]

The first half century of Western development was accomplished without
the aid of cheap fuel. This lack was really a blessing in disguise,
for it applied the needed spur that finally forced the utilization of
its protean water powers. But with the development of its latent oil
resources there became available a fuel whose cheapness and convenience
should enable the West to compete in the manufacturing field.

There has been no factor of greater use and with less recognition, in
this attainment, than the aid given by the engineer. The first and most
pressing problem was the taming of the furious force of newly tapped
gushers, so as to regulate and control their flow with reference to
reservoir capacity. But so irresistible were some that they could no
more be restrained than can the waves of the ocean. Millions of barrels
flowed to wanton waste. Earthen barricades were hastily built around open
pools, and considerable oil was thus preserved, only to be flooded into
an unready market, whose demand was not sufficient to absorb the sudden
oil supply. Nor were the existing means of transportation suitable.

Here, indeed, was work to be done. How quickly a market was created is
indicated by the fact that in 1906 the local consumption was greater than
the production. This was due to an accumulation caused by low prices, the
average being less than twenty-five cents, and the minimum ten cents. A
fleet of tank steamers and a pipe line across the Isthmus of Panama soon
gave access to the Atlantic, and Pacific possibilities were vigorously
developed, so that the demand has already doubled this price.

With regard to the crude oil, boilers and furnaces have been
reconstructed so as to efficiently use the new fuel. Radical changes
were necessary in order to provide increased air capacity and new means
of air distribution. The very best of our engineering talent have been
so successfully concerned with this problem that fuel oil is now used
in nearly every steam plant on land and sea, for both stationary and
locomotive use. Petroleum-enriched water gas is much superior in cost and
quality to the illuminant it is displacing, and now requires considerable
oil. Smelting with oil will soon be an accomplished fact in spite of many
difficulties, and oil engines such as the Diesel also utilize the crude.

Following its utilization as fuel, there came its varied applications as
a refined product. Gasoline and engine oils were separated for use in the
various types of explosive engines, lubricating oils were distilled to
make the running easier, and from the residue, asphalt was taken to meet
the good roads movement. Many other varied uses have been developed for
this product, including its application to roofing and weatherproofing.
Chemists have found that most of the California oil, as well as that from
the Texas fields, contains an asphaltum rather than a paraffine base,
which thus distinguishes them from most of the Eastern oils.

Coincident with this increasing use of oil during the past decade have
been the improvements in the method of carrying it. The great expense of
reaching this engineer-made market demanded that cheap transportation be
provided. Long pipe lines have been built, which pour the oil directly
into the refinery or into ships that take it to a foreign market. One
nearly three hundred miles long was constructed, but proved inoperative
on account of the great viscosity of the oil. But even this difficulty
has been met and overcome by an entirely new principle that promises to
solve the problem, and forms one of the interesting stories the “Journal”
has yet to tell.

Not less important than the engineering problems already outlined is that
detailed in this issue by our friend, Mr. Clem. A. Copeland. Disastrous
fires have consumed millions of gallons, and any means that lessens this
needless waste is welcomed. Incidentally it illustrates the importance
of studying other jobs in relation to their possible application to new
problems. The adoption of long-span work required courage, which has been
justified by the results. It is not our province to discuss the ethics
of competitive struggles which have characterized the history of oil
wherever developed in large quantities in this country. But, as long as
competition endures, stagnation is prevented, and it is undoubtedly due
to this stress that so much engineering ingenuity has resulted.




COMMERCIAL DAY AT THE NATIONAL ELECTRIC LIGHT ASSOCIATION


Mr. Geo. W. Williams, who is one of the best known commercial men in
the country, and Mr. Frank B. Rae, of Selling Electricity, are joint
editors on what will probably be one of the very interesting features
of that particular part of the convention, namely: “An illustrated talk
on the methods of creating demand for electricity.” This will include
stereoptican views showing in detail the progress of the outline and sign
lighting in large and small cities.




PERSONAL.


C. K. King, vice-president of the Ohio Brass Company, is expected in San
Francisco this week.

P. H. Coolidge has come from Chicago to take the management of the
Western Electric Co. of San Francisco.

W. A. Blair succeeds Mr. R. L. Van Valkenberg as assistant treasurer of
the Western Electric Co. Mr. Van Valkenberg will go East on May 15th.

Alonzo Gartley, General Mgr. Hawaiian Electric Co., Honolulu, is in San
Francisco as a member of the Hawaiian Governor’s staff, on the way East
to attend the Roosevelt conference.

W. I. Otis, who has been associated with the Western Electric Co. for the
past five years, severs his connection with the company on May to open
an office at 111 New Montgomery St., is the representative of several
responsible Eastern manufacturers.

Tracy E. Bibbins, San Francisco manager Supply Department General
Electric Co., has recovered from the shock and minor injuries received in
the recent wreck of the “Owl,” and is receiving the congratulations of
his friends on having escaped without serious injury.

James D. Schuyler, hydraulic engineer, of Los Angeles, Cal., has been
appointed member of a board of engineers to investigate and report on
a power plant in Japan for an English syndicate to operate the street
railways in Tokio and Yokohama, and to furnish current for lighting and
power of those cities.




OBITUARY


Mr. Samuel B. Rawson, president of the Dean Electric Co., died Thursday,
April 9, 1908, at Elyria, Ohio.




TRADE CATALOGUES.


Holophane Reflectors for Gem, Meridian, Tantalum and Tungsten lamps are
illustrated and described in Bulletin No. 6 from the Holophane Company of
New York City.

Bulletin No. 21 from H. Krantz Mfg. Co., 160-166 Seventh St., Brooklyn,
N. Y., illustrates and describes Standard and Water-Tight Boxes for
all electrical installation purposes. This line includes floor, wall,
ceiling, elevator, receptacle, switch, conduit and junction boxes, as
well as boxes with plugs and receptacles for either wood, concrete or
parquet floors or marine installations.

The General Electric Company, Schenectady, N. Y., in Bulletin No.
4,576, describes the Type F, Form K-3 line of oil switches for panel
installation and remote control, on systems of 4,500 volts or less.
The object of Bulletin No. 4,578 is to describe the essentials of the
various standard controllers that are manufactured for railway service,
with special reference to the operating conditions for which each type
is suited. Among the controllers described are Type B, which include
the necessary contacts and connections for electric braking, Type K for
series parallel operation of the motors, Type L, also in the series
parallel class, but which completely open the power circuit when changing
from series to parallel; Type R, which are designed to control the
motor speeds by means of resistance only, and a brief outline of the
Sprague-General Electric Type M control system. The General Electric CQ
motor is described in detail in a 16-page bulletin. This motor is for
direct-current circuits, and is made up to 20-horsepower in size, and for
voltages, of 115, 230 and 550. The application of the motor to linotype
equipments, ventilating outfits, machine tools, etc., is also outlined.
The extensive tables of dimensions, capacities, etc., in the bulletin,
will be found very useful in preparing specifications.




CIVIL SERVICE EXAMINATIONS.

Switchboard Attendant (Male).


The United States Civil Service Commission announces an examination
on May 6, 1908, to secure eligibles from which to make certification
to fill a vacancy in the position of switchboard attendant (male),
$900 per annum, United States Military Academy, West Point, N. Y., and
vacancies requiring similar qualifications as they may occur in any
branch of the service. The examination will consist of letter-writing,
practical questions, and experience. Applicants for this examination
should be practical electricians. They should state accurately in
their applications what experience they have had in the handling of
both alternating- and direct-current switchboards and alternating- and
direct-current generators; also experience with various meters used in
measuring high-voltage currents, rheostats, transformers, and other
apparatus used in a power house.

An examination will be held on May 6, 1908, to fill a vacancy in
the position of assistant engineer, $900 per annum, office of the
Attorney-General, Washington, D. C.; a vacancy in the position of
engineer, $1,020 per annum, Freedmen’s Hospital, Washington, D. C.;
and vacancies requiring similar qualifications as they may occur.
Applicants who have had experience in plumbing should so state in
their applications, as such experience is required for the position in
Freedmen’s Hospital. The examination will consist of letter-writing,
practical questions in mechanical and electrical engineering (comprising
the construction and operation of the heating plant and electric lighting
and elevator machinery in first-class public buildings), and experience
in mechanical and electrical engineering work.




GAS ENGINEERING.


In order to meet the constantly increasing demand for training in gas
engineering, four courses have been established at Cornell University.
First, a course of lectures on the general theory of gas engines;
second, a course of lectures on gas engine design; third, a drafting
room course in gas engine design; and fourth, a lecture course which
treats of the engineering problems involved in the conversion of various
solid and liquid fuels into gas fuels, and in the transmission of gas
fuels. This course discusses the different gas making processes and gives
descriptions and studies of designs of apparatus used. The object of
these four courses is to give to the student taking them the fundamental
ideas of modern gas engineering.

The gas engine laboratory, which was moved into one of the small
buildings in the court after the building had been rendered fireproof
by concrete walls and floor, has proved a very satisfactory addition
to the laboratory and will doubtless produce much valuable scientific
information. It is now equipped with examples of every important type of
gas engine which has been produced since the time of Brayton. A producer
gas plant is being installed and will soon be in practical operation.
Through the kindness of John Wilkinson, M. E., Cornell 1889, chief
engineer of the Franklin Co., a four-cylinder Franklin automobile engine
has been presented.




PATENTS


CUT-OUT. 884,978. John H. Booth, Frank E. Blausey, and Arthur M. Smith,
San Pedro, Cal.

[Illustration]

A cut-out comprising a base having a line terminal and an instrument
terminal, a drop lever pivotally mounted on the base, line terminal being
connected with the pivotally mounted drop lever, lever having its free
end provided with a fork, a bracket to which the instrument terminal is
connected, bracket being also provided with a fork, a fuse resting in the
forks, and supporting the drop lever, and a carbon block having a ground
connection connected with the cut-out adjacent to the end of the fuse
which rests in the fork of the bracket.

       *       *       *       *       *

PROCESS OF MAKING GAS. 884,655. Alexander M. Gow, Edgewood Park, Pa.,
assignor, by mesne assignments, to the Westinghouse Machine Company.

[Illustration]

The process of making gas, which consists in blowing to incandescence the
exterior portion of a body of fuel, forcing fresh fuel into the interior
of the body, utilizing the sensible heat of the incandescent fuel in
the destructive distillation of the fresh fuel, introducing steam into
the interior portion of the body of fuel and causing it to pass, first
through the fresh fuel and then through the heated exterior portion of
the fuel bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

ELECTRIC HEATER. 884,540. Elihu Thomson, Swampscott, Mass., assignor to
General Electric Company.

[Illustration]

An electric heater comprising a receptacle, containing oil having a high
flashing point and means for circulating the same, a resistance conductor
immersed in the oil and adapted to heat the same, and a heating system
partially within the container and arranged to receive its heat from the
circulating oil.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPACT WATER-WHEEL. 884,907. William A. Doble and Frederick Gfeller, San
Francisco, Cal.

[Illustration]

The combination with the body of an impact wheel, of buckets each having
at separated points, one in advance of the other, a central and two
parallel perforated ears, the perforations of the central ear of each
bucket axially in line with those of the parallel ears of the contiguous
bucket, and bolts passing transversely through perforations and through
the body.

       *       *       *       *       *

SYSTEM OF CONTROL FOR ELECTRIC MOTORS. 884,541. Leonard A. Tirrill, Lynn,
Mass., assignor to General Electric Company.

[Illustration]

The method of operating a compound-wound motor, which consists in
supplying current to the armature and field windings, cutting out the
armature and connecting the series field winding to the source of current
supply, connecting the armature in reverse relation to the series field
winding, and then inserting a high resistance in series with the shunt
field winding.




THE PASSING OF A PIONEER.


In our advertising columns this week, announcement is made of the
retirement from active business of the California Electrical Works of
San Francisco and the continuance of that business under the name of
the Western Electric Company, which has directed its operation since it
assumed control in 1901.

With this change there passes into history a name so closely identified
with the pioneer days that to write the history of the California
Electrical Works is to write the history of the electrical business of
the early days of California.

The year 1871 witnessed the incorporation of the Electrical Construction
and Maintenance Company, afterward the California Electrical Works. The
officers were George S. Ladd, president, John G. Ayres, business manager,
and S. B. Field, electrician and secretary. Their location was on the top
floor of a small frame building at the corner of Montgomery and Jackson
Streets, San Francisco.

This company absorbed all the business formerly handled by outside
electrical enterprise and acquired by purchase the interests of
Lundberg & Marwedell, who had been carrying on a limited business in
the manufacture of telephone apparatus and supplies, including the
manufacture of all telegraph instruments used by the Western Union
Telegraph Company on the Pacific Coast.

Previous to the incorporation of the Electrical Construction and
Maintenance Company, electrical development on the Pacific Coast had been
entirely confined to the operations of the California State Telegraph
Company.

In the year 1863, three telegraph circuits entered the city of San
Francisco, these being composed of No. 9 iron wire supported on redwood
poles and insulated with hook insulators; but two of these circuits could
be worked at the same time, the “cross fire” between conductors rendering
a separate pole line for each conductor a necessity. In those days every
trouble on the line was attributed to the fogs which were then as now
very dense at certain periods of the year.

In the year 1865 the fire alarm telegraph was introduced in San
Francisco, and Mr. Field was one of the operators of this system. The
following year, 1866, the first private telegraph line was constructed
between the offices of Kelly, Hewston & Company and their refinery about
a mile away. This circuit was made of baling wire—about No. 14 plain
iron—with a joint every 150 feet. The instruments, battery and dial
(“A. B. C.”) were from A. T. & J. N. Chester & Company of New York. The
success of this line was so immediate that quite a demand sprang up for
such installations, numbers of which were constructed and installed by
the Electrical Construction and Maintenance Company under the supervision
of Mr. Field. It may be of interest to know that these instruments cost
$125 each in greenbacks, which were then rated at about 50 to 80 cents on
the dollar, and were sold in San Francisco for $250 each in gold.

Housetop line construction cost $125 per mile and pole line construction
about $250 per mile.

About 1874, the American District Telegraph System was introduced in San
Francisco, the promoters being the various stockholders of the Electrical
Construction and Maintenance Company, although the business was carried
on under a separate incorporation.

On June 14, 1876, the company consolidated with Mr. Paul Seiler and
Dr. Hirsch and incorporated under the name of the California Electrical
Works, changing their location to the third floor of a brick building on
Sutter Street.

In the year 1877 the telephone was introduced on the Pacific Coast, the
first exchange being opened in the District Telegraph office on Sansome
Street, San Francisco. In the summer of 1878 the first long-distance
telephone line was constructed for the North Bloomfield Gravel Mining
Company and various other adjacent claims commenced at French Corrall
in Yuba County. It extended to nearly the summit of the Sierra Nevada
Mountains, the total length of the line being about sixty miles with
twenty-four stations. This line was installed by the California
Electrical Works, the principal work being done by Mr. John O’Neil. In
this connection it will no doubt be of interest to know that he is still
in the employ of the company and we are indebted to him for much of the
information contained in this article.

During these early years the California Electrical Works wired most of
the principal buildings and residences in San Francisco, including the
old Palace Hotel, the James B. Haggin residence, the Goad residence, the
Concordia Club, General Colgan’s residence, the Mark Hopkins’ Institute,
the Leland Stanford residence, the Chas. Crocker residence and many
others. These names represent many of the most prominent early pioneers
in California. Most of the wiring was for call bells and the wire used on
the first installations was insulated with cotton braid and afterwards
varnished, the work being done in the shop of the California Electrical
Works.

The first drop annunciator on the Pacific Coast was installed by the
California Electrical Works in the office of the Grand Hotel which was
directly across the street from the old Palace Hotel. This annunciator
remained in service until the earthquake and fire of 1906.

In 1877 the company installed the first electric light power station
on the Coast. The old California Theater and Auction House, once so
famous, was nightly illuminated with “Jarblokoff” candles. During the
year 1878 the company obtained from Mr. Thos. A. Edison the first
generator for incandescent lights seen in the West, this machine being
one of the historical bi-polars with a capacity of about 160 lights.
It was installed in the H. S. Crocker building on Bush Street, as an
exhibit, and attracted a great deal of attention. The sockets for the
lamps were very cumbersome and had no keys and there was only one switch
on the line, this being placed on the frame of the generator. Shortly
afterwards, this machine was installed as a permanent exhibit in the old
Mechanics’ Pavilion on Larkin Street, and as a result the California
Electrical Works installed quite a number of them during the next two
years.

In 1886 the business was moved to 35 Market Street, where better
accommodations and increased floor space were obtained. In 1890 they
again moved to 409 Market Street, where, owing to the increased volume
of the business, they occupied three floors. On December 16, 1901, the
Western Electric Company acquired the controlling interest in the company
and located at 547 Mission Street, where three floors and a basement were
occupied for offices and stock. They remained in these quarters until the
completion of their present building at 642 Folsom Street, where they
moved in January, 1906, three months before the catastrophe which visited
San Francisco.

Farewell to the California Electrical Works. Welcome to the Western
Electric Company.




BROOKS-FOLLIS AT HOME.


The accompanying illustrations show the new home of the Brooks-Follis
Electric Corporation, 44-46 Second Street, San Francisco, Cal. Mr. Frank
Fowden, President of the company, has clearly demonstrated what can be
accomplished through perseverance, will and optimism in San Francisco’s
future.

[Illustration: EXTERIOR.]

At the time of the fire in 1906, this firm was located on Mission
Street. The business was apparently demolished, but April 24th found the
Brooks-Follis Electric Corporation bobbing up serenely at 563 Thirteenth
Street, Oakland, where shipments were made as rapidly as material could
be obtained.

[Illustration: INTERIOR.]

In July, 1906, a corrugated iron building at 212-214 First Street,
became the temporary San Francisco home of the firm, where all orders
were handled to the best possible advantage under the conditions existing
at that time. These quarters were acceptable while San Francisco was
being settled and the business growing.

At the present central location all the electrical men from the interior
can take a Market Street car and drop in at 44-46 Second Street, take
a seat in Mr. Fowden’s office, read the “Electrical Journals,” use the
telephone and make themselves quite at home.




TURBINE ACTIVITIES IN THE FAR EAST.


No less than ten machines, aggregating 25,000 horsepower, are included in
a large shipment of Westinghouse turbo-electric power equipment from East
Pittsburg to the Far East. Most of these machines will go to Japan for
the equipment of railway, lighting, and manufacturing plants.

One of the first machines to be put in service will be a 1,500-kilowatt
turbine unit for Manila, to be installed in a station with four other
machines of like construction put into service several years ago. Past
experience with these machines has resulted in the recent extension. It
will be recalled that this railway system was engineered and constructed
by the American engineering firm of J. G. White & Co.

Hardly second in importance is the large turbine station of the Osaka
Electric Company, Osaka, Japan, now building. This will be one of the
largest power stations in Japanese territory, and will contain, for the
present, 15,000 kilowatts in five units. Three of these machines are now
being shipped from East Pittsburg. The remainder will follow as fast as
they can be built and tested. The Osaka installation is under direct
charge of Messrs. Takata & Co., of New York and Tokio.

In the strictly manufacturing field, there are two installations in
process of erection, for the Imperial Steel Works of the Japanese
government and the ship yards of the Hakkaido Tanko Steamship Company.
Two 500-kilowatt Westinghouse-Parsons turbo units will comprise an
initial installation in each of these plants. This gratifying reception
of American motive-power machinery in the Far East, especially Japan, may
be regarded as an index of future operations where government inspection
is exceedingly rigid and is exercised along lines much more detailed than
in this country.




The General Electric Company has obtained very satisfactory results with
the tungsten lamp. They have shipped over 75,000 to all parts of the
country, and the breakage in shipment is below one and one-half per cent.
They state that they are issuing a new bulletin covering tungsten lamps,
both series and multiple, and have a large production, good stocks, and
are in position to make prompt shipment, particularly of the 100-watt and
all types of tungsten lamps which they have standardized.




TRADE NOTES


The American Automatic Telephone Co., formerly of Rochester, N. Y.,
and the Select Telephone Mfg. Co., formerly of Springfield, Ohio, are
now located in their new plant at Urbania, Ohio, under the name of the
American Automatic Telephone Co.




NEWS NOTES


POWER AND LIGHT.

Meadow Lake, Wash.—The Washington Water Power Company will build a
power-house.

Eugene, Ore.—It is reported that the Willamette Valley company which
supplies Eugene with electric light and power is soon to install an
entirely new equipment of engines and dynamos in the generating plant at
this place.

Republic, Wash.—The county commissioners granted to Arthur Phillips and
H. D. Merritt franchises, each for a period of thirty-five years, to lay
water mains from Deer Creek to the town of Orient, water pipes throughout
the town, and for a pole line and wiring lighting the town and furnishing
heat and power.

Twin Bridges, Mont.—Henry Pankey, superintendent of the Easton and
Pacific mines, above Virginia City, has returned from California and will
at once push matters connected with the erection of an electric power
plant at Blaine Springs, which is intended to furnish electric power for
the lighting of the county seat.

New Westminster, B. C.—Managing Director Buntzen, of the British Columbia
Electric Railway, held a conference with the city council recently to
discuss the necessity of erecting a new dam at Lake Coquitlam. Mr.
Buntzen agreed that it was necessary, the present one being but a
temporary affair. He will recommend the erection of a dam of the best
construction to be put up this year.

Cranbrook, B. C.—The mining and general industries of southeast Kootenai
will be vigorously stimulated by the fact that Wisconsin capital has
now been secured to put through and fully equip the undertaking of the
Bull River Power and Light Company on Bull River, near Fort Steele.
The enterprise involves the production of over 10,000 horsepower of
electrical energy from the river.

Lewiston, Ida.—Development of power on the Clearwater River at Lewiston
is at last to become a reality. Work has begun on a power plant within
the city limits of Lewiston, which will eventually develop more than
50,000 horsepower. The North Coast Power Company, represented in this
field by Engineer Frank McKean and George W. Tannahill, is the concern
undertaking the work, and it is understood that the power so developed
is to be used for an extensive system of interurban lines connecting
Lewiston and vicinity with Clarkston, Asotin, Anatone, Cloverland, and
Pomeroy, and extending into the Craig Mountain timber belt and to the
cement, lime, and coal deposits on the Snake River above Lewiston.

Tacoma, Wash.—With the granting of a franchise by the county
commissioners to Donald Fletcher, the electric power plant to be
established on the Teanaway River, at Cle Elum, in Kittitas County,
is expected to be a reality. The franchise calls for the beginning of
work within two years, a completion of one-fourth of it in five years,
and operation in ten years. By the franchise, permission is granted to
Mr. Fletcher to string his electric cable along all of the roads in
Pierce County. The line will also have to pass through King and Kittitas
Counties. Mr. Fletcher’s plan is to build his power plant below the
government dam on the Teanaway River, where he believes that at least
110,000 horsepower can be developed. The current brought from the river
will be used in supplying light and power in Buckley, Puyallup, Sumner,
and Tacoma, and other cities in Pierce and King Counties, according to
present plans.


ELECTRIC RAILROADS.

Columbus, Mont.—There will be an electric railroad built between Columbus
and Cooke City, a distance of sixty miles, and work on the proposition
will commence within the next two months.

Helena, Mont.—It is possible that the Helena Light and Railway Company
will expend $70,000 in constructing a new car line to the fair grounds
this summer, and in purchasing cars and equipment for handling the crowds
which attend the annual State fair.

Turner, Ore.—The Oregon Electric has just finished its survey from Salem
to this place, and Turner people confidently expect an electric railroad
in a short time. There is an impression that the road will continue on
south to Albany or that a branch line will be built east into the Stayton
neighborhood.

Okanogan, Wash.—The financial aid of English capitalists, who will
take over an issue of $3,000,000 in bonds at 85 cents net, practically
has assured the construction of the Okanogan electric railway, a road
75 miles long, which will pass directly through the Okanogan country,
according to A. M. Dewey, who has offices in the Empire State Building,
Spokane.

Woodburn, Ore.—A standard-gauge electric railroad will be built by the
Valley Railway Company from West Woodburn to Woodburn, three miles, and
thence through Monitor to Scotts Mills, and on up into the foothills
to Wilhoit Springs, a health resort in the Cascades. A branch will be
extended from Monitor to Silverton. Construction work will be commenced
May 15.

Portland, Ore.—An electric railway company organized by Portland and
Seattle men will build a line from Condon to Bend, crossing the John Day
River and securing power from that stream, also erecting a dam 200 feet
high in the Deschutes River and developing power there. Among those who
are engineering the deal are Dr. H. I. Keeney, George C. Mason, and Mark
W. Gill.

Pendleton, Ore.—An electric line from Pendleton to Irrigon, touching at
Echo, Fosters, Hermiston, and Umatilla, and tapping all that vast section
of country now being reclaimed by the government and other private
irrigation concerns, is one of the plans of Dr. H. W. Coe, of Portland,
who is promoting lands under the Furnish project. A preliminary survey
has already been made. The proposed road will be a little more than 50
miles long. It will also eventually be connected with the Milton-Walla
Walla electric line.


INCORPORATION.

Santa Barbara.—The Monterey Oil and Development Company has been
incorporated with a capital stock of $100,000 by Santa Maria people.

Bakersfield.—The Golden Gate Oil Company has been incorporated with a
capitalization of $500,000. The directors are E. D. Gillette, G. R.
Neill, W. H. P. McDonald, H. Lucas, and M. S. Platz.

Santa Ana.—Articles of incorporation have been filed by the Consolidated
Petroleum Corporation. The incorporators are A. W. Casey, K. A. Snyder,
James McDonald, and others, all of Los Angeles. The corporation is
capitalized at $1,000,000.

Modesto.—Articles of incorporation have been filed by the Tuolumne Water
and Power Company. The capital stock is $1,000,000. The incorporators
are Warren Gregory and H. H. Rolfe, of San Francisco; Geo. Whipple, of
Alameda; Winfield Dorn, of Oakland; and J. L. Lamson, of Berkeley.


TRANSPORTATION.

Douglas, Ariz.—Douglas and Bisbee are to be connected by an interurban
traction line, which is being projected by Cochise County capitalists
under the name of the Cochise County Electric Railroad Company. The men
interested in the project are James S. Douglas, W. H. Brophy, and George
H. Neale. The capital stock is $500,000.

Walla Walla, Wash.—The County Commissioners have granted a franchise
to the Mt. Hood Electric Railway Company to construct and operate an
electric railway along the edge of the cemetery. The only condition
attached is that the company start construction by the first of the year
and have the road completed by January 1, 1910.

Los Angeles.—The City Council has passed ordinance 16,320, granting the
Los Angeles Railway Company the right to construct and, for a period
of 21 years, to operate and maintain a double-track electric street
railroad, commencing at the intersection of San Pedro and Thirtieth
Streets, thence southerly along San Pedro Street to its intersection with
South Park Avenue.

Pasadena.—The City Council has agreed to turn down the request of the
Pacific Electric Company for a franchise from Lake Avenue to east city
limits on California Street and to turn down the proposition of the
company to vacate rights to build on several streets in Pasadena, but
voted to grant a franchise on East California Street for a short strip of
railway between Mentor Avenue and Tournament Park, where the company has
no franchise.

Klamath Falls, Ore.—The Klamath Falls Electric Railway Company is making
arrangements for the extension of its street car line this summer. C. N.
Hawkins and W. K. Brown, directors of the company, will superintend the
work. E. R. Reames, local manager, states that the Belt Line will likely
be completed, as negotiations are now under way for enough steel for the
entire circuit. The old horse car will be replaced by some kind of motor.

Portland, Ore.—The announcement has been made simultaneously with
the increase of the capital stock of the Oregon Electric Company
from $2,000,000 to $10,000,000 that the company would begin actual
construction on the first of 283 miles of extension branches and laterals
to the Portland-Salem electric line, which was placed in operation within
the last few weeks. The roads mapped out are from Portland to Tillamook
via Hillsboro; Portland to Eugene via Corvallis; Salem to Mill City,
Salem to Dallas, Salem to Albany, and Albany to Cascadia.

Woodland.—T. C. Gregory, president of the Vallejo & Northern Railroad,
states that he has taken up the condemnation proceedings against the Reed
Orchard Company for the large tract of land which the company wishes to
acquire opposite Sacramento. The promoters of the road say that they now
have all the strategic positions, and a request has been filed with the
attorney-general for permission to bring suit in the name of the State
against the city of Sacramento, in order to obtain the freight franchise
in that city, regarding which some trouble has been experienced.

Portland, Ore.—An electric railway company has been organized by Portland
and Seattle capitalists, among them being Dr. H. I. Keeny, Geo. C. Mason,
and Mark W. Gill, with Eastern capital also behind them, for the purpose
of building an electric railway from Condon to Bend, crossing the John
Day River. A dam 200 feet high will be erected in the Deschutes River and
power developed there. It is proposed to tap the coal field near Madras
and serve the Oregon King gold mine, controlled by Jack Edwards, near
Ashwood. The concern will be known as the Portland Construction Company.


TRANSMISSION.

Oroville.—The new Humbug Valley power plant is but one of a number of
plants that the Oro Water, Light and Power Company is preparing to
construct.

Placerville.—James O’Brien and Robert Duncan have filed notice of the
location and appropriation of 5,000 inches of water of the main fork of
the Cosumnes River, for power, mining, and irrigation.

Lewiston, Idaho.—Commissioners Salsberg and Miller have reported
favorably on the application of the North Coast Power Company for a tract
of ground near the water plant for a period of three years, to be used as
a site for a power plant.

Chihuahua, Mex.—The Aguila Amalgamated Mining Company, which has taken
over eight properties in the Hostotipaquilla district in Jalisco, is
planning to erect an electric power plant on Santiago River. J. Burpee
Melly, of Boston, Mass., is president of the company.

Placerville.—R. H. Sterling, manager of the American River Electric
Company, is at the company’s power-house near this place to inspect the
recent work of repairs which has been going on at the power-house for the
past two months. Four Pelton water wheels have been installed at a cost,
including setting, of $10,000. The new wheels have a capacity of 6,000
horsepower and take the place of those placed five years ago. The large
switchboard has also been received and other improvements made. Assistant
Superintendent H. McGuirk and twenty-five men have been employed on the
job.

San Francisco.—Agents of E. H. Harriman have secured valuable water
rights in the Sierra Nevada and Siskiyou Mountains of California at four
strategic points. Harriman is planning for the future, by means of these
water rights, to generate electric power for the movement of Southern
Pacific trains on various sections of its lines. The rights are located
in the mountains of Kern County, east of Bakersfield; in Fresno County,
east of Fresno; in El Dorado County, on the Rubicon River, and on the
Klamath River, in Siskiyou County. It is stated that fully $15,000,000
ultimately will be spent in developing power at these points. The power
generated on the Rubicon River will operate Southern Pacific trains
between Sacramento and Reno, Nevada. When this electric power plant is
completed, Harriman will have finished his proposed 35,000-foot tunnel in
the Sierra Nevada Mountains.


ILLUMINATION.

Porterville.—Z. G. Peck, representing the firm of Bennison & Bruntion,
Los Angeles contractors, has asked for a franchise to lay gas pipes and
mains.

Portland, Ore.—The County Commissioners have granted a franchise to C. L.
Pritchard for an electric light system complete for the town of Washougal.

East Newport.—Test work has commenced on the natural gas locations in
the big asphaltum beds just across the bay from this point, which were
filed on recently by W. W. Wilson, P. T. Evans, and Archie Sharpe, of
Riverside, and Lew W. Wallace, of Newport. If the supply of natural
gas is found to be sufficiently large to warrant it, a plant will be
established and pipe lines will be run to Newport and East Newport for
lighting and cooking purposes.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF ELECTRICITY, POWER AND GAS, VOLUME XX, NO. 18, MAY 2, 1908 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


