The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Story of Our Flag, Colonial and National
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Story of Our Flag, Colonial and National

Author: Addie Guthrie Weaver

Release date: June 16, 2016 [eBook #52354]
                Most recently updated: June 14, 2020

Language: English

Credits: E-text prepared by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org); music transcribed by Linda Cantoni


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF OUR FLAG, COLONIAL AND NATIONAL ***


E-text prepared by Emmy and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org); music transcribed by Linda Cantoni



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations
      and audio files with music.
      See 52354-h.htm or 52354-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/52354/pg52354-images.html)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/files/52354/52354-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/storyofourflagco00weav




      
[Illustration]


THE STORY OF OUR FLAG,

Colonial And National, with Historical Sketch
of the Quakeress Betsy Ross

by

ADDIE GUTHRIE WEAVER.

Colored Illustrations of the Flags and Washington’s Coat of Arms
by the Author







Published by
A. G. Weaver,
Chicago.

Entered according to Act of Congress,
in the year 1898,
By Addie Guthrie Weaver,
In the office of the Librarian of Congress,
at Washington, D. C.




Preface.


For some years the Author has been interested in the history of our
First Flag and its fair maker, Betsy Ross, and fortunately, through a
family relationship with one of the descendants, became familiar with
much of the family history.

It seemed that so beautiful and estimable a lady, and one who played so
important a part in those stirring events of our early history should
be better known and appreciated by her sisters of to-day.

Fitting, it seems, that while man in defending our Flag has
accomplished his greatest achievements, and won undying fame, woman
first fashioned into “a thing of beauty” the symbol of that patriotic
devotion.

To Mr. George Canby of Philadelphia, and Mrs. Sophia Campion Guthrie
of Washington, D. C., grandson and great granddaughter, respectively,
of Betsy Ross, the author is indebted for family history that has
inspired this work, and to them and other descendants, this book is
affectionately dedicated by

                                                THE AUTHOR.

[Illustration:

Sketched by Helen Hayes.

_Flag House of Betsey Ross. 239 Arch St._ Philadelphia.]




The Story of Our Flag.

COLONIAL AND NATIONAL.


The history of our flag from its inception, in fact, the inception
itself, has been a source of much argument and great diversity of
opinion. Many theories and mystifications have gone forth, mingled
with a few facts, giving just enough color of truth to make them seem
plausible. It is for the purpose of clearing away the veil of doubt
that hangs around the origin of the Stars and Stripes that this book
has been written.

The Continental Congress in 1775 was very much disturbed over the
embarrassing situation of the colonies, and after Washington was
appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Army, it showed its independence by
appointing a committee composed of Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Harrison
and Mr. Lynch to create a colonial flag that would be national in its
tendency. They finally decided on one with thirteen bars, alternate
red and white, the “King’s Colors” with the crosses of St. Andrew and
St. George in a field of blue. The cross of St. Andrew then, as now,
was of white, while the cross of St. George was of red. The colonies
still acknowledged the sovereignty of England—as this flag attested—but
united against her tyranny. This was known as the “flag of our
union”—that is, the union of the colonies, and was not created until
after the committee had been to the camp at Cambridge and consulted
with Washington. It was probably made either at the camp at Cambridge
or in Boston, as it was unfurled by Washington under the Charter Oak on
January 2, 1776. It received thirteen cheers and a salute of thirteen
guns.

It is not known whether Samuel Adams, the “Father of Liberty,”
was consulted in regard to this flag, but it is a well known fact
that he was looking forward, even then, to the independence of the
colonies, while Washington, Franklin and the others still looked for
justice,—tardy though it might be,—from England.

Two days later, on the 4th of January, 1776, Washington received the
King’s speech, and as it happened to come so near to the time of the
adoption of the new flag, with the English crosses of St. Andrew and
St. George, many of the regulars thought it meant submission, and the
English seemed for the time to so understand it; but our army showed
great indignation over the King’s speech to parliament, and burned all
of the copies.

In a letter of General Washington to Joseph Reed, written January 4, he
says: “We are at length favored with the sight of his majesty’s most
gracious speech, breathing sentiments of tenderness and compassion for
his deluded American subjects. The speech I send you (a volume of them
were sent out by the Boston gentry) was farcical enough and gave great
joy to them without knowing or intending it, for on that day (the 2nd)
which gave being to our new army, but before the proclamation came to
hand, we hoisted the Union flag, in compliment to the United Colonies,
but behold it was received at Boston as a token of the deep impression
the speech had made upon us and as a signal of submission. By this time
I presume they begin to think it strange that we have not made a formal
surrender of our lines.”

[Illustration]

At this time the number and kinds of flags that were in use on land
and sea, were only limited to the ingenuity of the state and military
officials. This was very embarrassing. On May 20, 1776, Washington
was requested to appear before Congress on important secret military
business. Major-General Putnam, according to Washington’s letters, was
left in command at New York during his absence. It was in the latter
part of May, 1776, that Washington, accompanied by Colonel George
Ross, a member of his staff, and by the Honorable Robert Morris,
the great financier of the revolution, called upon Mrs. Betsy Ross,
a niece of Colonel Ross. She was a young and beautiful widow, only
twenty-four years of age, and known to be expert at needle work. They
called to engage her services in preparing our first starry flag. She
lived in a little house in Arch street, Philadelphia, which stands
to-day unchanged, with the exception of one large window, which has
been placed in the front. It was here, in this house, that Washington
unfolded a paper on which had been rudely sketched a plan of a flag of
thirteen stripes, with a blue field dotted with thirteen stars. They
talked over the plan of this flag in detail, and Mrs. Ross noticed that
the stars which were sketched were six-pointed, and suggested that they
should have five points. Washington admitted that she was correct, but
he preferred a star that would not be an exact copy of that on his coat
of arms, and he also thought that a six-pointed star would be easier to
cut. Mrs. Ross liked the five-pointed star, and to show that they were
easily cut she deftly folded a piece of paper and with one clip of her
scissors unfolded a perfect star with five points. (See illustration
showing the way Betsy Ross folded the paper giving the five-pointed
star which has ever since graced our country’s banner. A, first fold of
a square piece of paper; B, second; C, third, and D, fourth fold. The
dotted line AA is the clip of the scissors.)

There is no record that Congress took any action on the national
colors at this session,—but this first flag was made by Betsy Ross
at this time, and in this way, and we find in Washington’s letter of
May 28, 1776, to General Putnam at New York, positive instructions
“to the several colonels to hurry to get their colors done.” In the
orderly book, May 31, 1776, are these words: “General Washington has
written to General Putnam desiring him in the most pressing terms, to
give positive orders to all the colonels to have colors immediately
completed for their respective regiments.” The proof is positive that
the committee approved the finished flag of Betsy Ross, and she was
instructed to procure all the bunting possible in Philadelphia and make
flags for the use of congress, Colonel Ross furnishing the money.

It is easily understood how on account of the meager resources of
Congress and the unsettled condition of affairs generally, together
with the fact that legislative action was extremely slow and tedious,
that Colonel Ross should expedite matters by defraying the expense
of this first order for our national colors. There is little, if
any, doubt but that Washington on December 24th, Christmas Eve, in
1776, carried the starry flag in making that perilous trip through
ice and snow across the Delaware, leading his sturdy, but poorly
equipped troops. How inspiring to look back to that night when the
Massachusetts fishermen so skilfully managed the boats that the
whole army was safely landed and in line of march at four o’clock on
Christmas morning. The story of how they plodded on through ice and
snow, surprising and defeating the Hessians and capturing a thousand
men and their ammunition and equipments, is well known. This was the
battle of Trenton, which changed the whole aspect of the war, even
causing Lord Cornwallis to disembark and again start in pursuit of
Washington, whose cause he had so lately declared lost. It is fitting
here to speak of that friend of Washington, Robert Morris, one of the
committee that originated our national colors, the great patriot who
after the battle of Trenton went from house to house, soliciting money
from his friends to clothe and feed this glorious army, which had
fought so well.

Congress was very slow to act, and did not seem able to command
even the meager resources of the different colonies. It lacked the
centralized government which gives it such strength to-day. Considering
the grave questions affecting the life and liberty of the people, it is
not strange that the flag or any definite action regarding it, was not
given prompt consideration. To indicate how slow Congress was to act in
regard to the flag, we have only to refer to the Congressional records,
which show that the resolution for its adoption was dated over one year
after it was actually created, by the committee of which Washington was
chief; that is on June 14, 1777. However, a month previous to this,
Congress sent Betsy Ross an order on the treasury for £14, 12s. 2d.,
for flags for the fleet in the Delaware River, and she soon received
an order to make all the government flags. The first flag was made of
English bunting, exactly the same as those of to-day, excepting that
our bunting now is of home manufacture.

There seems to be no question but that these colors, the stars and
stripes, were unofficially adopted immediately after the completion of
the first flag, the latter part of May, 1776, and that they went into
general use at once, so far as it was practicable under the conditions
then existing. Washington had the first flag created at this time.
It was satisfactory, and he immediately instructed General Putnam to
have the colonels prepare their colors—the colors that had just been
approved, and which we know to be our flag of to-day.

The first reference we have of an English description of our flag is at
the surrender of General Burgoyne, October 17, 1777, when one of the
officers said: “The stars of the new flag represent a constellation of
states.”

Mr. George Canby, an estimable gentleman of the old school, and a
grandson of Betsy Ross, has been tireless and indefatigable in his
researches on the subject of our flag, and he claims, as did his
brother, Mr. William J. Canby, before him, that the first flag with
stars and stripes went into immediate use after its inception in the
latter part of May, 1776.

The Declaration of Independence was passed by Congress on July 4,
1776, and some authorities, of whom Admiral Preble is the best, seem
to infer that the Cambridge flag, with its English crosses, which was
unfurled by Washington under the Charter Oak, was still carried by our
armies until Congress took action in 1777. That Washington or Congress
would sanction the carrying of this flag after the Declaration of
Independence seems absurd, and it is certainly against all proof, as
well as against the records of the family whose ancestor made the first
flag.

Peak’s portrait of Washington at the battle of Trenton, December 26 and
27, 1776, shows the Union Jack with the thirteen stars in the field
of blue. Admiral Preble says, this is “only presumptive proof” that
the stars were at that time in use on our flag, but Titian R. Peale,
son of the painter, says: “I visited the Smithsonian Institute to
see the portrait of Washington painted by my father after the battle
of Trenton. The flag represented has a blue field with white stars
arranged in a circle. I don’t know that I ever heard my father speak of
that flag, but the trophies at Washington’s feet I know he painted from
the flags then captured, and which were left with him for the purpose.”
He further says: “He was always very particular in the matters of
historic record in his pictures.”

This Preble admits in his book, but evidently thought that the artist,
Peale, took the flag as it was then (1779), and not the flag of 1776,
which the writer claims was identically the same. Through persistent
research many facts have come to light that would doubtless have
changed the opinion of the late Admiral Preble—facts that were unknown
to him.

On Saturday, June 14, 1777, Congress finally officially adopted the
flag of our Union and independence, to-wit:

Resolved, “That the flag of the thirteen United States be thirteen
stripes, alternate red and white; that the Union be thirteen stars,
white in the blue field, representing a new constellation.”

There is not the slightest record in any of the mss. journals in the
library of Congress, or in the original files or in the drafts in
motions made in the continental Congress of any previous legislative
action for the establishment of a national flag for the United States
of America, whose independence was declared nearly a year previous.
Even after the official adoption of the flag it was not thoroughly
brought before the people for many months. All of this adds to the
proof that Congress was simply adopting and legalizing a flag that
was in general use. That there was no recorded discussion in Congress
regarding the adoption of our flag, was perfectly natural, because the
star spangled banner came in with our independence, and at this time
(June 14, 1777) was simply being officially acknowledged.

There is some diversity of opinion as to how the red, white and blue
arranged in the stars and stripes came to be thought of as our flag.

The flag of the Netherlands, which is of red, white and blue stripes,
had been familiar to the pilgrims while they lived in Holland, and its
three stripes of red, white and blue were doubtless not forgotten. But
it seems most probable that the coat of arms of the Washington family
furnished more than a suggestion. The coat of arms of his ancestors,
that had been adopted by him, comprised the red, white and blue and the
stars; and was familiar to all who were associated with Washington. He
it was who brought the pencil drawing, when, with the others, he called
upon Mrs. Ross to have a suitable flag made, and as we find no mention
in history, records or diaries as to who made the drawing, it seems
conclusive that he himself designed and drew the plan from his own coat
of arms, which was entirely different from England’s colors which had
become necessarily distasteful.

It seems fitting in this place to write a little history in regard
to the Washington coat of arms, the earliest mention of which was by
Lawrence Washington, worshipful mayor of Northampton, England, in 1532.
In 1540 he placed it upon the porch of his manor house, and on the tomb
of Ann, his wife, in 1564. At the old church at Brighton, England,
the tombs of Washington’s ancestors are marked by memorial plates of
brass bearing the arms of the family, which consisted of a shield that
bore the stars and stripes. The Archeological Society of England, the
highest authority on ancient churches and heraldic matters, states that
from the red and white bars, and stars of this shield, and the raven
issuant from its crest (borne later by General Washington), the framers
of the constitution took their idea of the flag.

When General Washington’s great-grandfather, Sir John Washington,
came to this country in 1657, the family shield was brought with him.
Sir John settled in Virginia, and established the American line of
Washingtons. George Washington afterwards had it emblazoned upon the
panels of his carriages, on his watch seals, book marks, and his dishes
also bore the same emblem.

[Illustration: COPYRIGHT 1898, BY ADDIE G. WEAVER.]

[Illustration: WASHINGTON COAT OF ARMS.

The accompanying plate shows the form and colors of the Coat of Arms of
the Washington family, back as early as 1300.

The name first appeared as De Wessynton; then Weshyngton, and, finally,
Washington.

How appropriately our own beautiful shield of the United States comes
in here, and why not? was he not the “Father of Our Country”? and what
more natural than that he should have left the imprint of his life and
characteristics in symbol?

The central figure is a fac-simile of his book plate.]

After the admission of Vermont and Kentucky into the Union, Congress
passed an act in 1794, increasing both the stars and stripes from
thirteen to fifteen, to take effect May, 1795. It was as follows:

“An act making alterations in the flag of the United States. Be it
enacted, etc., That from and after the first day of May, one thousand,
seven hundred and ninety-five, the flag of the United States be fifteen
stripes, alternate red and white, and that the union be fifteen stars,
white in a blue field.

“Approved January 13, 1794.”

This flag was used for several years. It flew at the mastheads of
our gallant ships and was carried by our little army in the war with
England in 1812. A few years later Tennessee, Ohio, Louisiana and
Indiana, now won to civilization by hardy pioneers, clamored for
admittance into the Union. When they were finally admitted as states,
another change in the flag became necessary. The sturdy young republic
was advancing by leaps and bounds in civilization and wealth; its
hardy sons pushing further west and south constantly, reclaiming from
wild savages, to the uses of their own race, greater and larger areas,
which were bound to be erected into states and take their places in the
family of the original thirteen. It became manifest that legislation
was necessary, permanently defining the national flag, and providing
for such changes as the future development of the country would
require. Congress rose to the occasion. A committee, with Hon. Peter
Wendover of New York as chairman, was appointed to frame a law, and
with very little delay the committee reported a measure fulfilling
every requirement then existing, and providing for all the future. The
measure was passed by congress and went on the statute books as the law
establishing the flag as our great-grandfathers of that day knew it,
and as we know it to-day. The law has never been changed, and here it
is:

“An act to establish the flag of the United States.

“Section 1. Be it enacted, etc., That from and after the fourth day
of July next, the flag of the United States be thirteen horizontal
stripes, alternate red and white; that the Union have twenty stars,
white in the blue field.

“Sec. 2. And be it further enacted, That on the admission of every
new state into the Union, one star be added to the union of the flag,
and that such addition shall take effect on the fourth of July next
succeeding such admission. Approved April 4, 1818.”

The thirteen stripes will always represent the number of the “old
thirteen” whose patriotism and love of justice brought about the
independence of America. The stars that come into the blue sky of
the flag will mark or indicate the increase of the states since the
adoption of the Constitution. It is interesting to note that under the
stars and stripes Washington, in 1793, laid the corner stone of the
capitol of the United States, first having personally selected the
site of the building. It is also interesting to know that Washington
did not live to see the capitol completed, but died before the seat of
government was moved to Washington in 1800. The main capitol building
was not completed till 1811. It is also a matter of historical interest
that the president’s home, now called the White House, was completed
during the life of Washington, and it is an authenticated fact that
he and his wife inspected the house in all its parts only a few days
before his death. The president’s house was practically destroyed by
the British in 1814; the walls alone remained intact, but the stone was
so discolored that when the building was reconstructed, it had to be
painted, and from this came the name of the “White House.”

The large picture of Washington, by Stewart, which is now in the east
room, at the time of the bombardment by the British, was taken out of
its frame by Mrs. Dolly Madison, wife of the president, and sent to a
secure place across the river.

This flag of forty-five stars, this flag of our country, is our
inspiration. It kindles in our hearts patriotic feelings, it carries
our thoughts and our minds forward in the cause of liberty and right.
On sea and on land, wherever the star spangled banner waves, it thrills
the heart of every true American with pride. It recalls the memories
of battles bravely fought. It recalls the victories of Trenton and
Princeton, it recalls the victories of Gettysburg and Appomattox. We
see the flag as first carried by Paul Jones across the sea; we see
the flag as carried by Commodore Perry on Lake Erie; we see the flag
as carried by Farragut at New Orleans; we see Admiral Dewey through
smoke and fire hoisting the flag in the Philippines. This same flag was
carried to victory by Admirals Sampson and Schley in Cuba. This flag
recalls the many battles bravely fought and grandly won. It symbolizes
the principles of human progress and human liberty. The stars represent
the unity and harmony of our states. They are the constellation of our
country. Their luster reflects to every nation of the world. The flag
of 1776, the old thirteen, has grown to be one of the great flags of
the earth. Its stars reach from ocean to ocean. We see it leading the
armies of Washington and Greene, of Grant and Sherman and Sheridan, and
of Miles, Shafter and Merritt.

This is the flag of the “dawn’s early light” that was immortalized by
Francis Scott Key—“The Star Spangled Banner.”

General Grant once said, “No one is great enough to write his name on
the flag.”

A century under the stars and stripes has been the greatest century of
progress in the history of the world. No other nation that has ever
existed has carried forward such a banner. Its colors were taken from
various sources and brought into one harmonious combination, and it
“waves over a country which unites all nationalities and all races,
and in the end brings about a homogeneous population, representing the
highest type of civilization.” It is not strange that this flag of
Washington, of Hamilton, of Adams, of Jefferson; this flag of Jackson,
of Webster, of Clay, this flag of Lincoln, of Grant and of McKinley
should exert such world-wide influence. It holds a unique place in the
nations of the world. It has spread knowledge and faith and hope among
all classes. It means liberty with justice. Its international influence
places it in the first rank. It twines itself among the flags of other
nations, not for destruction or war, but for friendship and progress
in the cause of humanity. In the councils of peace; in the conquests
of war; in everything that pertains to government, in everything that
pertains to the advancement of humanity, it calls forth the admiration
of mankind. Under its influence the arts and sciences have been
fostered, commerce has expanded and education has been made universal.
It waves for the right and the harbors of the globe will salute this
banner as a harbinger of progress and peace.

The youngest nation has the oldest flag.

It is of historical interest that our flag is older than the present
flag of Great Britain, which was adopted in 1801, and it is nine years
older than the flag of Spain, which was adopted in 1785. The French
tricolor was decreed in 1794; then comes the flag of Portugal in 1830;
then the Italian tricolor in 1848; then the flags of the old empires
of China and Japan, and of the empire of Germany, which represents the
sovereignty of fourteen distinct states established in 1870.

Prior to the Revolution, and indeed during the evolution of a nation
through the crucible of war, separate and distinct flags were popular
with the colonists. Nearly every colony had at least one. They were not
abandoned until it became apparent the colonies were never again to be
colonies, but to form a nation with one flag, one set of institutions
and laws, a fact which inspired the visit of Washington to Betsy Ross
as told in the foregoing papers. Many of the colonial flags were
interesting.


GROUP OF COLONIAL FLAGS, NO. 1.

The two upper flags of this group represent those used at Bunker Hill
July 18, 1775, and bore these inscriptions: On one side, “An Appeal to
Heaven,” and on the other, “Qui Transtulit Sustinet”—He who transported
will sustain.

These were beautiful flags, and research shows that both colors were
used.

Trumbull gives the red in his celebrated painting in the capitol at
Washington, and other authentic accounts show that the blue flag was
carried also—the color being the only difference in the two.


THE PINE TREE FLAG.

The pine tree flag which was a favorite with the officers of the
American privateers, had a white field with a green pine tree in the
middle and bore the motto, “An appeal to heaven.”

This flag was officially endorsed by the Massachusetts council, which
in April, 1776, passed a series of resolutions providing for the
regulation of the sea service, among which was the following:

Resolved, That the uniform of the officers be green and white, and
that they furnish themselves accordingly, and that the colors be a
white flag with a green pine tree and the inscription, “An appeal to
heaven.”—Harper’s Round Table.

[Illustration: COPYRIGHT 1898, BY ADDIE G. WEAVER.]

The striped Continental flag opposite the pine tree flag was of red and
white stripes without a field.


THE RATTLESNAKE FLAG.

The device of a rattlesnake was popular among the colonists, and its
origin as an American emblem is a curious feature in our national
history.

It has been stated, that its use grew out of a humorous suggestion
made by a writer in Franklin’s paper—the Pennsylvania Gazette—that, in
return for the wrongs which England was forcing upon the colonists,
a cargo of rattlesnakes should be sent to the mother country and
“distributed in St. James’ Park, Spring Garden and other places of
pleasure.”

Colonel Gadsden, one of the marine committee, presented to Congress, on
the 8th of February, 1776, “an elegant standard, such as is to be used
by the commander-in-chief of the American navy; being a yellow flag
with a representation of a rattlesnake coiled for attack.”


WASHINGTON LIFE GUARD FLAG.

There is probably no more interesting revolutionary flag than this. The
Washington Life Guard was organized in 1776, soon after the siege of
Boston, while the American army was encamped near New York.

It was said to have been in the museum at Alexandria, Va., which was
burned soon after the war of the rebellion, and nearly everything lost.
It was of white silk with the design painted on it.

The uniform of the guard was as follows: blue coat with white facings,
white waistcoat and breeches, with blue half gaiters, a cocked hat and
white plume.


THE GRAND UNION FLAG.

These were the colors selected by Franklin, Harrison and Lynch, and
unfurled by Washington under the Charter Oak, January 2, 1776, and
hereafter described.

The flag of the Richmond Rifles follows with the one used at Moultrie.

The latter was of blue with white crescent in the dexter corner and was
used by Colonel Moultrie, September 13, 1775, when he received orders
from the Council of Safety for taking Fort Johnson on James Island,
South Carolina.

In the early years of the Revolution, a number of emblems were in use
which became famous. The standard on the southeast bastion of Fort
Sullivan (or Moultrie, as it was afterward named), on June 28, 1776, by
Colonel Moultrie, was a blue flag with a white crescent in the upper
left hand corner, and the word “Liberty” in white letters emblazoned
upon it.

This was the flag that fell outside the fort and was secured by
Sergeant Jasper, who leaped the parapet, walked the whole length of the
fort, seized the flag, fastened it to a sponge staff and in sight of
the whole British fleet and in the midst of a perfect hail of bullets
planted it firmly upon the bastion. The next day Governor Rutledge
visited the fort and rewarded him by giving him his sword.

Then comes the flag of White Plains, October 28, 1776, with little
historical importance.

The flag made by Betsy Ross, under the direction of General Washington,
Robert Morris, and Colonel George Ross, consisted of thirteen bars,
alternate red and white, with a circle of thirteen stars in the field
of blue.

[Illustration: COPYRIGHT 1898, BY ADDIE G. WEAVER.]


COUNT PULASKI’S FLAG.

The Moravian sisters of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, gave to Count
Pulaski’s corps, which he had previously organized at Baltimore and
which was called “Pulaski’s Legion,” a beautiful crimson silk banner,
embroidered in yellow silk and sent it with their blessing. Pulaski was
at this time suffering from a wound, and was on a visit to Lafayette,
whose headquarters were at Bethlehem. Count Pulaski was a Polish
patriot, born March 4, 1747. After having bravely fought for Poland
with his father and brothers until the Polish cause became hopeless, he
came to America, arriving in Philadelphia in 1777. He entered the army
as a volunteer, but performing such brave service at Brandywine, he
was promoted to the command of cavalry with rank of brigadier-general.
In 1778 Congress gave him leave to raise a body of men under his own
command. Longfellow has most beautifully described the presentation
of the flag in verse. Pulaski bore this flag to victory through many
battles until he fell mortally wounded at Savannah, October 14, 1779.
The banner was saved by his first lieutenant, who received fourteen
wounds, and delivered it to Captain Bentalon, who on retiring from
the army, took it home to Baltimore. It was carried in the procession
which welcomed Lafayette in 1824, and was then deposited in the Peale
Museum. In 1844 Mr. Edmund Peale presented it to the Historical Society
of Maryland, where it is now preserved in a glass case. These are
interesting historical facts.

Flag of red and blue bars with serpent stretched across and words,
“Don’t Tread on Me.”

Another flag of white, with blue bands top and bottom and a pine tree
in center, with the inscriptions: Liberty Tree and An Appeal to Heaven.


THE “DON’T TREAD ON ME” FLAG.

Another use of the rattlesnake was upon a ground of thirteen horizontal
bars alternate red and white, the snake extending diagonally across the
stripes, and the lower white stripes bearing the motto—“Don’t Tread on
Me.” The snake was always represented as having thirteen rattles, and
the number thirteen seems constantly to have been kept in mind. Thus,
thirteen vessels are ordered to be built; thirteen stripes are placed
on the flag; in one design thirteen arrows are grasped in a mailed
hand; and in a later one thirteen arrows are in the talons of an eagle.


ANOTHER “DON’T TREAD ON ME” FLAG.

One of the favorite flags also was of white with a pine tree in the
center. The words at the top were “An Appeal to God,” and underneath
the snake were the words, “Don’t Tread on Me.” Several of the companies
of minute men adopted a similar flag, giving the name of their company
with the motto “Liberty or Death.” This flag is familiar to the public
as the annual celebrations bring out descriptions of it in the press.


THE PRESIDENT’S FLAG.

Within the last few years special flags have been designed for the
President, the Secretary of the Navy and Secretary of War. The
President’s flag is a very beautiful blue banner, in the center of
which is a spread eagle bearing the United States shield on its breast,
with the thirteen stars in a half circle overhead. It is flown at the
main mast-head of naval vessels while the President remains on board,
and on being hoisted it is the signal for the firing of the President’s
salute.


COLONIAL AND PATRIOTIC MUSIC.

The colonial music was mostly borrowed and adapted to the occasion. The
Pilgrims had more important duties to perform and in those years of
stirring events no one was in a mood to write music.

The first song to be used was that old and familiar one, “Yankee
Doodle.” It made a powerful rallying cry in calling to arms against
England. It is so old that it is impossible to decide just where the
term came from.

It has been traced back to Greece—“Iankhe Doule,” meaning “Rejoice, O
Slave,” and to the Chinese—“Yong Kee,” meaning “Flag of the Ocean.” It
is said the Persians called Americans “Yanki Doon’iah,” “Inhabitants of
the New World.” The Indians too, come in for their share of the credit
of originating the term, as the Cherokee word “Eankke,” which means
“coward” and “slave,” was often bestowed upon the inhabitants of New
England.

At the time of the uprising against Charles the First, Oliver Cromwell
rode into Oxford, on an insignificant little horse, wearing a single
plume in a knot called a “macaroni.” The song was sung derisively by
the cavaliers at that time. The tune is said to have come from Spain or
France, there being several versions of the words.

It came into play when our ancestors flocked into Ticonderoga in answer
to the call of Abercrombie. At that early day no one refused, but all
answered the call and came equipped as best they could, but hardly any
two alike, and to the trained English regulars must have presented a
ridiculous appearance. Dr. Shamburg changed the words of the old satire
to fit the new occasion. But in less than a year it was turned by the
Yankees against the English in the form of a rallying cry and possessed
new meaning.

History had emphasized it, and with the accompaniment of the shrill
pipe and half worn drum calling the simple cottagers together, it must
have aroused all their noble and sturdy patriotism.

Who that has viewed that stirring picture in the Corcoran Art Gallery
at Washington, “Yankee Doodle,” could fail to catch the inspiration of
the scene. The old man with his thin grey locks, but head erect and
face glowing with enthusiasm as he keeps time to the old tune, followed
by the small boy with his drum. One scarcely knows whether humor or
pathos predominates: but certain we are that all alike stepped to its
chords; it found an answering echo in each heart and led them on to
glory.


YANKEE DOODLE.

    Father and I went down to camp.
      Along with Captain Goodwin,
    And there we saw the men and boys
      As thick as hasty pudding.

    CHORUS.

    Yankee Doodle, keep it up.
      Yankee doodle dandy;
    Mind the music and the step.
      And with the girls be handy.

    And there was Captain Washington,
      Upon a slapping stallion.
    A giving orders to his men.
      I guess there was a million.—Cho.

    And then the feathers on his hat.
      They looked so tarnal finey,
    I wanted peskily to get
      To give to my Jemima.—Cho.

    And there they had a swamping gun.
     As big as a log of maple,
    On a duced little cart,
     A load for father’s cattle.—Cho.

    And every time they fired it off
      It took a horn of powder;
    It made a noise like father’s gun,
      Only a nation louder.—Cho.

    I went as near to it myself
      As Jacob’s underpinin’,
    And father went as near again,
      I th’t the duce was in him.—Cho.

    It scared me so, I ran the streets,
      Nor stopped as I remember,
    Till I got home and safely locked
      In granny’s little chamber.—Cho.

    And there I see a little keg.
      Its heads were made of leather;
    They knocked upon it with little sticks
      To call the folks together.—Cho.

    And then they’d fife away like fun
      And play on corn-stalk fiddles;
    And some had ribbons red as blood
      All bound around their middles.—Cho.

    The troopers, too, would gallop up,
      And fire right in our faces;
    It scared me almost to death
      To see them run such races.—Cho.

    Uncle Sam came there to change
      Some pancakes and some onions,
    For ’lasses cake to carry home
      To give his wife and young ones.—Cho.

    But I can’t tell you half I see,
      They keep up such a smother:
    So I took off my hat, made a bow,
      And scampered off to mother.—Cho.


AMERICA.

Rev. Samuel Francis Smith was born in Boston October 21, 1808, and
graduated in the class of ’29 from Harvard University. He enjoyed
the honor of having for his classmate Oliver Wendell Holmes, in
whose beautiful poem, entitled “The Boys,” the name of the author of
“America” is affectionately mentioned.

    And there’s a nice youngster of excellent pith;
    Fate tried to conceal him by naming him Smith.
    But he shouted a song for the brave and the free,
    Just read on his medal—“My Country of Thee”!

“America” was written in 1832, the tune being the old one of “God Save
the Queen,” and first rendered on the 4th of July of the same year by
the children of Park St. Church, Boston.


AMERICA.

    My country, ’tis of thee,
    Sweet land of liberty,
      Of thee I sing!
    Land where my fathers died,
    Land of the pilgrims’ pride,
    From every mountain side
      Let freedom ring.

    My native country, thee—
    Land of the noble free,
      Thy name I love.
    I love thy rocks and rills,
    Thy woods and templed hills.
    My heart with rapture thrills
      Like that above.

    Let music swell the breeze
    And ring from all the trees
      Sweet Freedom’s song!
    Let mortal tongues awake,
    Let all that breathe partake,
    Let rocks their silence break,
      The sound prolong.

    Our fathers’ God, to thee,
    Author of Liberty!
      To Thee we sing:
    Long may our land be bright
    With freedom’s holy light,
    Protect us by Thy might,
      Great God, our king!


    Peace follows where it finds the Old Thirteen, the
    nucleus around which the other stars have gathered in
    their glory.

                                 —_Letitia Green Stevenson_,
    _Honorary Vice President General National Society, Daughters
           of the American Revolution._




[Illustration: _The_ OLD Thirteen

A PATRIOTIC SONG

DEDICATED TO THE

SONS, DAUGHTERS and CHILDREN OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION]


    1. Flag of the free, we hail thee with pride.
       Float thou in freedom o’er all the land wide;
       Emblem of pow’r where’er thou art seen. Yet
       still we are true to The Old Thirteen.
       Our fathers who fought a free country to make.
       Who suffered and died for sweet liberty’s sake.
       What joy had been theirs had they only foreseen
       How vast we should grow from The Old Thirteen—
       Forty-five stars now shine in thy blue,
       Forty-five states to thee will be true—
       As heroes of old keep their memory green.
       Who marched with the flag of The Old Thirteen.

    2. We’ll work for thy glory forever and aye.
       We’ll celebrate ever that dearly bought day;
       Thy folds floating o’er us in triumph were seen,
       So valiantly won by The Old Thirteen.
       We’ll rally around thee from near and from far,
       Our standard forever in peace or in war,
       All nations salute thee, thy stars’ mighty sheen,
       Full splendor thou art of The Old Thirteen.
       Then hail we our emblem, each daughter and son,
       Honor the vict’ry thy fair folds have won;
       Tho’ multiplied stars float in freedom serene,
       Enshrined in our hearts is The Old Thirteen.

[Illustration:

WORDS BY

Corrilla Copeland Lewis

MUSIC BY Harriet Hayden Hayes.]


STARS ON THE FLAG.

The Home Magazine contains the following beautiful suggestion regarding
the placing of the stars on the flag:

Number 1 is the field of our first stars and stripes made by Betsy Ross.

Number 2 represents that field of flag of 1814 which inspired the “Star
Spangled Banner.”

Number 3 the field of 1818 designed by Capt. S. C. Reid.

Number 4, field of our present flag.

Although there is no law saying who shall arrange the stars on our
flag, or how they shall be arranged, it is customary for the changes to
be made in the war department when new states have been admitted to the
Union.

[Illustration]

The incongruous variations in figures A, B, C, which are reproductions
of unions taken from new flags, made by different manufacturers, would
not exist if there was a law fixing the arrangement of the stars.

[Illustration]

It is believed by many that the stars on our flag should be arranged
into a permanent and symmetrical form, fixed by law, instead of the
present changeable and uncertain form, which is subject in a great
measure, to the caprice or convenience of the flag maker. It is not
generally known that among the many flags in use in our country to-day,
there is an utter lack of uniformity in the arrangement of the stars.

In the selection of a form, three different things should be
considered—its historical significance, symmetry, and adaptability.
The stars should be so arranged that it will not be necessary to make
any noticeable change when new ones are added. The stars should always
remain equal in size, representing the equality of the states.

[Illustration]

In the form which is submitted, No. 8, with the group of thirteen stars
in the center, representing the thirteen original states, they are
arranged in exactly the same form as they appear on the great seal of
the United States. The circle containing twenty-three stars, represents
the states which were admitted to the Union up to the close of the
civil war. These two features are symbolic of the two great events in
the nation’s history—the one which brought our flag into existence,
and the other which made its life permanent by welding the sisterhood
of states into a perfect and indestructible union. The circle is also
symbolic of unity, peace, and preservation.

The outside circle of nine stars, represents the states which have
been added to the Union since the civil war. New stars can be added to
this circle without changing the symmetry of the arrangement, as will
be seen by reference to the illustration. As this circle will always
remain an open one, there will always be room for one more star, and it
is thus significant of progression.

One great advantage in this form is, that it is suggestive of a
constellation, and thus carries out, as far as practicable, the idea of
the framers of the resolution of 1777 in establishing the flag.

John F. Earhart is the author of the above description of the different
forms of flags.


THE LIBERTY CAP.

The historians who have searched the archives of ancient and medieval
times tell us that this has been a symbol of liberty since the
Phrygians made the conquest of the eastern part of Asia Minor.

After the conquest they stamped it on their coins, and to distinguish
themselves from the primitive peoples they used the liberty cap as a
head dress. The Romans used a small red cap called a “pileus,” which
they placed on the head of a slave in making him free, and when Caesar
was murdered a Phrygian cap was carried through the streets of Rome
proclaiming the liberty of the people. The liberty cap of the English
is blue with a white border.

It remained for the United States to adopt the British cap, adding to
it the crescent of thirteen stars. Generals Lee and Schuyler, with the
Philadelphia Light Horse troop, adopted it in 1775. This is the famous
troop that escorted Washington to New York.

It is most familiar to us as seen on our coins, on which it was first
used after the Revolution as a symbol of freedom.

Edward Everett Hale, in one of his impressive orations, says: “The
starry banner speaks for itself; its mute eloquence needs no aid to
interpret its significance. Fidelity to the Union blazes from its
stars; allegiance to the government beneath which we live is wrapped in
its folds.”

The Stars and Stripes was officially first unfolded over Ft. Schuyler,
a military port in New York state, now the city of Rome, Oneida county.
It was first saluted on the sea by a foreign power, when floating from
the masthead of the Ranger, Capt. Paul Jones commanding, at Quiberon
Bay, France, February 14, 1778. The salute was given by Admiral La
Motte, representing the French government.

The first vessel over which the Union flag floated was the ship Ranger,
built at Portsmouth, New Hampshire, whose gallant commander was the
famous Paul Jones.

Its first trip around the world was on the ship Columbia, which left
Boston September 30, 1787, commanded by Captains Kendrick and Gray. It
was three years then in circling the globe. To-day it waves in every
clime, on every sea.

It is pleasing to note how Franklin, when minister to France, secured
the ship Doria from the French and gave to Paul Jones the command,
who immediately renamed the old ship “Bon homme Richard,” in honor of
Franklin.


ORIGIN OF “OLD GLORY.”

The term Old Glory is said to have been originated by an old
sailor—Stephen Driver.

While upon the seas he performed an act of bravery for which he was
rewarded by the gift of an American flag, whereupon he pledged its
givers to always defend it faithfully.

At the outbreak of the civil war he was living in Nashville, Tenn.

In order to keep the flag safely he concealed it in a bed-quilt under
which he slept. To the enemies of the Union he declared that Old Glory
would yet float from the staff of the Tennessee state house, and sure
enough when Nashville fell into the hands of Gen. Buell he secured the
flag from its hiding place and hoisted it to a more fitting position on
the state house—thus his nick-name for it became popular.


JOHN JAY AT MOUNT KISCO, JULY 4, 1861.

He said, “Swear anew and teach the oath to our children, that with
God’s help the American Republic shall stand unmoved though all the
powers of piracy and European jealousy should combine to overthrow
it. That we shall have in the future as we have had in the past,
one country, one constitution, one destiny; and that when we shall
have passed from earth, and the acts of to-day shall be matters of
history, and the dark power which sought our overthrow shall have been
overthrown, our sons may gather strength from our example in every
contest with despotism that time may have in store to try their virtue,
and that they may rally under the Stars and Stripes with our old time
war cry,

“‘Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable.’”


UNCLE SAM.

This term originated at the time of our war with England in 1812.
Provisions were purchased at Troy, N. Y., and the agent was Elbert
Anderson, the work being superintended by Ebenezer and Samuel Wilson,
the packages being marked E. A. U. S. Samuel Wilson was known all over
as Uncle Sam and he was often joked about his amount of provisions,
then the newspapers took it up and the term Uncle Sam came into
general use and is typical of our increasing national prosperity.
Quite recently a portrait of an actual personage whose features are
identical with those made familiar by caricatures of Uncle Sam, was
found in possession of a family near Toledo, Ohio. The portrait was
painted about 1818, but nothing is known of the shrewd, kindly old
man represented. His face was undoubtedly the origin of the accepted
caricature.


BROTHER JONATHAN.

Jonathan Trumbull, governor of Connecticut, was a warm friend of
General Washington, who had great confidence in his judgment.

When in need of ammunition and the question arose as to where they
could get the necessary means for defense Washington said: “We will
consult Brother Jonathan.”

After that whenever they needed help the expression became a common one
and naturally came to mean the United States Government.


THE AMERICAN EAGLE.

Our bald headed eagle, so called because the feathers on the top of
the head are white, was named the Washington eagle by Audubon. Like
Washington it was brave and fearless, and as his name and greatness is
known the world over, so the greatest of birds can soar to the heights
beyond all others.

In 1785 it became the emblem of the United States.

It is used on the tips of flag staffs, on coins, on the United States
seals, and on the shield of liberty.


BANNERS AND STANDARDS.

It is not generally known that the tassels which are pendent
customarily from the upper part of banners and standards, and the
fringe which surrounds them are relics of the practice of observing
sacred emblems. They originated in pagan devices and the garments of
priests and were consecrated to specific forms of worship.

Sacred history is full of instances of the consecration of tassels and
peculiar fringes to special sacerdotal uses. Blue was early the emblem
of purity and innocence and that fact accounts for the predominance
of that color in the ecclesiastical badges of these early times. When
the use of the tassels passed into profane customs, they were used as
ornaments for national standards and for royal girdles, and it was not
infrequent that they were first blessed by the priests. It has followed
naturally that this use has continued up to the present time, although
now it is retained probably because of the artistic effect of the
swinging pendants.


THE LINCOLN FLAG.

Presented by the French People.

The flag in the White House which formerly hung in the center of the
largest window in the east room, has a unique history.

It is woven of silk in one piece without a seam. There are gold stars
in the field and among them are seen the words in French, “Popular
subscription to the Republic of the United States, offered in memory of
Abraham Lincoln. Lyons, 1865.”


STATE FLAGS.

As the colonies had their flags of different kinds so the states one
by one adopted special flags and nearly all the states of the Union
now have a state flag or regimental color. In some states this emblem
is established by law, in other states by the military department or
the governor. There are a few states in which this special flag is
covered with particular devices chosen by the caprice of the donor or
the officials by whom the flag was authorized, but in all these cases,
the state arms form a part of the emblazonment. There is a general
feeling, however, that these special states flags should have no legal
recognition, and that the only flag to be thus recognized should be the
Stars and Stripes.


ORIGIN OF THE FLAG OF TRUCE.

It is interesting to know how and why the little white flag which is
always looked upon with breathless interest in the emergencies that
call it forth, first came to be used.

When carried by the lone soldier on horse or on foot between the armies
it has a significance that is always respected, and on the sea the
hoisting of this flag at the ship’s mast or the carrying of the flag
of white by boat to the enemy stops the firing of the guns. The custom
originated in the church in the tenth or eleventh century.

Curiously enough while it is the only flag that is to-day used by all
nations of the earth alike, no regularly made flag of truce is found in
the flag lockers of nations. It is improvised when the emergency arises
for its use. In the late war with Spain, such flags of truce as were
used were made of blankets, sheets, table cloths. It is a flag that
commands the enemy’s respect. An account of the origin of the flag of
truce lately published, is as follows:

“La peace et la treve de Dieu” (The peace and the truce of God) was an
agreement between the turbulent barons and the church, as severe injury
and loss was most frequently the result of the private warfares which
constantly raged.

To protect itself, but more especially to preserve justice and moral
order, the church established a system which has exercised a beneficent
influence down to this day.

The agreement stipulated a cessation of hostilities on certain
festivities and saint’s days, and from Saturday to Monday. The barons
and warrior class pledged during the time of war to extend full
protection to women, pilgrims, priests, monks, travelers, merchants
and agriculturists; to abstain from the destruction or injury of farm
implements, the burning of crops, and the killing of live stock of the
peasants. Penalties in violation of this agreement comprised money
fines, bafflings, banishment, and excommunication.

Originating in the south of France this system was soon adopted
through the whole of France, Italy, Spain, Germany, and England, and
in 1095 Pope Urban II. proclaimed its universal extension throughout
Christendom.

In time the Crown assumed this protective power, and the phrase was
changed to “La paix et la treve du Roi,” or “The peace and truce of
the king.” The republics recognized the time-honored institution, and
the simple unfolding of a white cloth will instantly cause a cessation
of hostilities. The adoption of a white emblem appears to be lost in
tradition, as authorities do not reveal it. Doubtless it is similar,
or may have arisen through a belief in the white Samite which shielded
the Holy Grail from the gaze of unbelievers. Emblematic of purity,
associated with the mythical knights of the Round Table, and used in
the Crusades, it is probable that this sacred truce flag may have
originated from the Samite of the Holy Grail.

At the present time, if presented during an engagement firing is not
required to cease; nor, if the bearer be killed or wounded, is there
ground for complaint. The truce emblem can be retained if admitted,
during an engagement. Penalties are incurred if the truce emblem be
wrongfully used, the severest being the ignominious death of a spy.

The following was written at the tomb of Washington in 1833 by Dr.
Andrew Reed, English philanthropist:

                     WASHINGTON.

    The Brave.       The Wise.       The Good.

    Supreme in War, in Council and in Peace.

                     WASHINGTON.

    Valiant     Discreet       Confident
    without     without        without
    Ambition.   Fear.          Presumption.

                   WASHINGTON.

    In Disaster Calm.     In Success Moderate.      In All Himself.

                   WASHINGTON.

    The Hero.     The Patriot.     The Christian.

    The Father of Nations, the friend of Mankind
                       who
    When he had won all renounced all
                    and sought
    In the Bosom of his family and of Nature
                   Retirement
          And in the hope of Religion
                  Immortality.

[Illustration: JANE CLAYPOOLE CANBY, Fourth Daughter of Betsy Ross.]


SKETCH OF BETSY ROSS AND HER HUSBANDS.

Elizabeth Griscom, a daughter of Samuel and Rebecka (James) Griscom of
Philadelphia, was born January 1, 1752. They were “Friends” and the
young Elizabeth grew into a most charming, bright and beautiful girl of
prepossessing manners and plain and quiet tastes.

Her father was a noted builder and assisted in the erection of the
state house, now Independence Hall. His house, shop and a very large
garden were on Arch street, between 3d and 4th streets.

Elizabeth, or Betsy, as she was fondly called, was the seventh
daughter. Her birthday was the first day under the new Gregorian
calendar.

It was frequently said by the family that “she was born the first day
of the month, the first day of the year, the first day of the new
style.” She was well trained by her mother, became very expert with her
needle and was very fond of embroidery.

Among her many admirers was John Ross, son of Æneas Ross, assistant
rector of Christ Episcopal Church. The young man was a nephew of the
Hon. George Ross, delegate to Congress, one of the signers of the
Declaration of Independence.

In December, 1773, at the age of twenty-one years, Elizabeth married
John Ross, an estimable young man. He was an Episcopalian, and in
consequence of her marrying out of meeting, she was disowned by the
Friends.

The first husband of Betsy Ross was of distinguished ancestry. The Hon.
George Ross, of New Castle, Delaware, had by his first wife, two sons:
John, who died May 5th, 1776; and Rev. Æneas, born Sept. 9th. 1716, who
was father of John Ross (husband of Betsy Ross).

By his second wife he had Hon. George Ross, signer of Declaration of
Independence, born 1730, died 1780; also one daughter, Gertrude, who
married George Read, also a signer of the Declaration of Independence;
also a son, Jacob, a physician.

The Hon. George Ross was a noted lawyer, and a resident of Lancaster.
He was a brave soldier and a man of ability.

John Ross was an apprentice with a man named Webster, an upholsterer
on Chestnut street. It was with him that John and afterwards Betsy,
learned the trade before they “ran off” to be married.

They then set up business for themselves, first on Chestnut street and
afterwards moved to the little house on Arch street, which was a simple
building when first occupied by them. It was built some time after
1752, notwithstanding romantic stories to the contrary. The first room
was utilized as a shop; the store front not having been added until
about 1858.

It was in this house that the flag was made later on.

In 1775 John Ross was injured while guarding military stores on the
wharf, from the effects of which he died at this house in January,
1776. He was buried in Christ Churchyard, 5th and Arch streets. He left
no children.

Mrs. Ross continued the upholstery business and the manufacture of
flags.

Betsy Ross married for her second husband, at Old Swedes Church,
Philadelphia, Captain Joseph Ashburn, June 15, 1777, and to them were
born two daughters:

Jillah, born September 15th, 1779. Died young.

Eliza, born February 25th, 1781. Who married Capt. Isaack Silliman, May
29th, 1799. After Capt. Silliman’s death in the army, his wife Eliza
lived with her mother, Betsy Ross, until her death in 1836.

To them were born four children:

Joseph Ashburn; Emilia; Jane; Willys.

Emilia left one daughter, Mrs. Mary Sidney Garrett, a widow and
childless. She is the only living descendant of the second marriage.

Joseph Ashburn was taken prisoner by the British on the sea, and with
the other soldiers was taken to England where he died in Mill Prison,
March 3d, 1782. The prisoners were all given an opportunity to enter
the British service, and on their refusal were thrown into prison. John
Claypoole, a comrade, and also a prisoner of war, nursed and cared for
Ashburn until he died. He brought home to his widow, on his release,
the diary of Ashburn, together with messages to his wife, with whom he
fell in love and afterward married.

John Claypoole, son of William and Elizabeth Claypoole, of
Philadelphia, was married to Elizabeth Ashburn (Betsy Ross) the 8th
of May, 1783, at Christ Church. His ancestor was James Claypoole,
who came to America as the friend of William Penn; and from whom all
the Claypooles mentioned are descended. He was a brother of Sir John
Claypoole, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Oliver Cromwell.

The children of John and Elizabeth Claypoole were: Clarissa Sidney,
born April 3, 1785, 9 a. m.; Susanna, born November 15, 1786, 4 p. m.;
Rachel, born February 1, 1789, 7 p. m.; Jane, born November 13, 1793, 7
p. m.; Harriet, born December 20, 1795, 5 a. m., died October 8, 1796.

There is an old Bible over a hundred years old, which has a record of
all these births and those of the Ashburn daughters; and of the deaths
in the handwriting of John Claypoole. It was “The legacy of Sarah
Hallowell to her niece, Elizabeth Claypoole,” that is, Betsy Ross.

John Claypoole was wounded in the battle of Germantown which, with
imprisonment and the hardships of war, so impaired his health that he
never regained it. So it may be truthfully said that the lives of her
three husbands were sacrificed to their country, and her experience
in these very important events in her life is certainly heroic. John
Claypoole died August 3, 1817.

Betsy Ross attended Christ Church, Philadelphia, with her first husband
and after his death continued in attendance until the Free Quaker
Society was organized in 1793. The pew in which she sat was quite near
one occupied by Gen. Washington, and is marked by a brass plate bearing
these words:

“In this pew worshipped Betsey Ross, who made the first flag.”

All Friends who took part in the Revolution were disowned by “The
Society of Friends.” After the war, they organized a society of “Free
Quakers” often called “Fighting Quakers.”

As the time went by, nearly all were taken back into the original
“Society of Friends,” but Clarissa Wilson and John Price Wetherell, of
Philadelphia, were the last of the Free Quakers. They used to attend
the little meeting house at 5th and Arch streets until there were just
the two of them. In the fall of 1830 they decided it was unwise to have
the little meeting house heated for them, so after that Clarissa Wilson
attended the Orange street meeting house, but was never again received
into the original society. She did not wish to be. She died a Free
Quaker. Betsy Ross, her mother, lived to be 84 years old and died in
1836. The following are from the original autographs of Betsy Ross and
her husband:

[Illustration: Elizabeth Claypoole

John Claypoole]


CHILDREN OF JOHN AND BETSY ROSS CLAYPOOLE.

                   { Elizabeth Griscom}       married James Campion
                   { Sophia           } twins    “    Charles Hildebrandt
  Clarissa         { Aquila Bolton     married        Sarah Ghriskey
  Sidney           { Clarissa Sidney      “           James Hanna
  (Wilson)         { Susan                “           Abram Sellers
                   { Rachel               “           Jacob Wilson Albright

                   { James,            bachelor
                   { Edwin             married        Martha Hallowell
                   { Abel                 “           Mary Burton
  Susanna          { Sidney               “           Cyrus Kinsey
  (Satterthwaite)  { Mary            not married
                   {                                      { This couple
                   { Susan         married  David Newport { still living in
                   {                                      { 1898 at Willow
                   {                                      { Grove,
                   {                                      { Philadelphia.


  Rachel           { Margaretta        married        —— Elliot
  (1st, Edward     { Mary                 “           Arthur Wigert
  Jones; 2nd, John { Daniel      not married; died at 21 yrs. of age
  Fletcher)


                   { Catharine         married        Lloyd Balderston
                   { Elizabeth        unmarried
                   { Charles           married        Susanna Kirk
                   { John                 “           Elizabeth Boustead
  Jane             { William              “           Louise Prescott
  (Canby)          { Caleb                “           Mary Preswick
                   { George               “           Matilda Goodwin
                   { Jane                 “           Abel Hopkins { Nephew
                   {                                               {   of
                   {                                               {  Johns
                   {                                               { Hopkins
                   { Mary                 “           Robert Culin

[Illustration]


THE OLD KEY MANSION.

The old Key mansion is one of the historic places that still remains on
the banks of the Potomac in Georgetown, to remind us that here lived
Francis Scott Key, the author of the national hymn “The Star Spangled
Banner.” In unveiling to him the monument which had been erected at
Fredericksburg, Maryland, during the past summer (1898), the Hon.
Murat Halsted paid an eloquent tribute to this poet, who crystallized
the best thought of the American people in giving to them “The Star
Spangled Banner.” “O’er the land of the free and the home of the
brave,” this flag still waves. Freedom to-day has a broader meaning
than in the days of 1814. Slavery has been abolished and freedom has
spread her wings o’er all the land. The history of the writing of this
beautiful song can be told in a few words. It was an inspiration. The
British had captured a friend of Francis Scott Key, Dr. Beans, and when
Key heard of it, he called upon President Madison, who furnished him
with a vessel to go to the British Admiral Cockburn’s ship, to endeavor
to secure his release. General Ross, of the British army, agreed to
release him, but insisted upon Key’s remaining on the admiral’s ship
until after the bombardment of Fort McHenry, which was then taking
place. Key was intensely anxious and in the early morning, he looked
across to the fort and saw that “the flag was still there.” It is
said that he then wrote a sketch of the “Star Spangled Banner” on the
back of a letter. The burning of the capitol and of the White House
a few days previous by them are well known matters of history. A few
days after, the British fleet sailed for Baltimore, where they were
gallantly repulsed with the loss of their commander, General Ross. The
fleet in passing Mount Vernon, lowered their flags out of respect to
the memory of the immortal Washington, whose remains are here entombed.

Key was born in Frederick county, Maryland, August 1, 1779. He
graduated at St. John’s College, Annapolis, Maryland.


THE STAR-SPANGLED BANNER.

    Oh, say, can you see by the dawn’s early light
     What so proudly we hailed at the twilight’s last gleaming.
    Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous fight,
     O’er the ramparts we watched were so gallantly streaming;
    And the rocket’s red glare, the bombs bursting in air,
    Gave proof through the night that our flag was still there!
    Oh, say, does that star-spangled banner yet wave
    O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

    On that shore, dimly seen through the mist of the deep,
     Where the foe’s haughty host in dread silence reposes,
    What is that which the breeze o’er the towering steep,
     As it fitfully blows, now conceals, now discloses?
    Now it catches the gleam of the morning’s first beam
    In full glory reflected now shines on the stream.
    ’Tis the star-spangled banner, oh, long may it wave
    O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

    And where is that foe which so vauntingly swore,
     That the havoc of war and the battle’s confusion,
    A home and a country should leave us no more?
     Their blood has washed out their foul footsteps’ pollution;
    No refuge could save the hireling and slave
    From the terror or flight or the gloom of the grave,
    And the star-spangled banner in triumph doth wave
    O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave!

    Oh, thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand,
     Between their loved homes and the war’s desolation;
    Blest with vict’ry and peace, may the heaven-rescued land
     Praise the Power that hath made and preserved us a nation.
    Then conquer we must when our cause it is just,
    And this be our motto, “In God is our trust”;
    And the star-spangled banner in triumph shall wave
    O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave.
                                         —Francis Scott Key, 1814.

[Illustration: COPYRIGHT 1898, BY ADDIE G. WEAVER.]


INVOCATION TO THE FLAG.

Dedicated to the D. A. R.’s.

    Our own dear flag, the stripes and stars,
      In peace like “bird of promise” flying.
    When War’s dread battles fiercely wage,
      All tyranny and wrong defying.

    Legions beneath its beckoning folds,
      Start at the sound of bugle calling.
    Eager to lift oppression’s yoke,
      From fainting brothers, bravely falling.

    Lead on, dear flag, our heroes true,
      O’er mountain pass and wild savanna.
    Till victories by their prowess won.
      Ring a new nation’s glad hozanna.

    Float o’er them where they bravely stand,
      The bursting shell and cannon daring,
    And glory wreathe their chaplets fair,
      Who fall, another’s burden sharing.

    Wave proudly on, where hastening ships
      Sweep the white wave, like tempest flying.
    Give freedom to the toiling slave,
      Give life to Cuba’s children dying.

    Shine on, bright stars, glad folds unroll
      O’er far-off islands care beseeching,
    Lighten old Afric’s age of night,
      Give aid to Asia’s millions reaching.

    On wings of dawn, where Orient smiles,
      To gates of sunset, ocean laving.
    Bear light and hope, while earth shall hail,
      Our flag, for right and freedom waving.

    June 14th, 1898.
                                    CARRIE P. GUTHRIE.


UNFURL THE FLAG.

By Rev. Artemas Jean Haynes, Pastor Plymouth Church, Chicago.

    Unfurl the flag! the flag of freedom’s birth—
      The stainless banner of our loyal host;
    Unfurl the flag! proclaim to all the earth
      That war for conquest is not Freedom’s boast.
    Shake out the crimson folds in God’s great strife—
    Our country’s pledge to liberty and life.

    Unfurl the flag! stand forth in Christ’s own name—
      For God’s dread day of Judgment is at hand;
    Unfurl the flag! and smite with sudden shame,
      Relentless tyrants from our sisterland.
    Each waving fold of white, each star shall bear
    Our love to those whose griefs we seek to share.

    Unfurl the flag! we battle not for gain—
      We march as those who march to right a wrong;
    Unfurl the flag! not to avenge the slain,
      Unfurl it for the weak who trust the strong:
    Fling out the blue! our battle flag unfurled—
    Warfare for love, and freedom for the world.

    Unfurl the flag! red, white and blue wave high—
      Wave on to battle every loyal son;
    Unfurl the flag! hear Thou, O God, our cry—
      Blaze Thou the way until our task be done;
    Until the night falls on the hosts of wrong,
    And morning breaks to Freedom’s triumph song.


THE AMERICAN FLAG.

By Joseph Rodman Drake.

    When Freedom from her mountain height
      Unfurled her standard to the air,
    She tore the azure robe of night,
      And set the stars of glory there;
    She mingled with its glorious dyes
    The milky baldric of the skies,
    And striped its pure celestial white
    With streakings of the morning’s light;
    Then from his mansion in the sun
    She called her eagle-bearer down,
    And gave into his mighty hand
    The symbol of her chosen land.

    Majestic monarch of the cloud!
      Who rear’st aloft thy regal form,
    To hear the tempest-trumpings loud,
    And see the lightning lances driven,
      When strive the warriors of the storm,
    And rolls the thunder drum of heaven—
    Child of the sun! to thee ’tis given
    To guard the banner of the free,
    To hover in the sulphur’us smoke,
    To ward away the battle-stroke,
    And bid its blendings shine afar,
    Like rainbows on the cloud of war,
    The harbingers of victory.

    Flag of the brave, thy folds shall fly
    The sign of hope and triumph high,
    When speaks the signal trumpet tone,
    And the long line comes gleaming on;
    And yet the life blood, warm and wet,
    Has dimmed the glistening bayonet,
    Each soldier’s eye shall brightly turn,
    To where thy sky-born glories burn;
    And, as his springing steps advance,
    Catch war and vengeance from the glance;
    And when the cannon-mouthings loud,
    Heave in wild wreaths the battle-shroud,
    And gory sabers rise and fall,
    Like shoots of flame on midnight’s pall.
    There shall thy meteor glances glow,
      And cowering foes shall sink beneath
    Each gallant arm that strikes below
      That lovely messenger of death.

    Flag of the seas, on ocean wave,
    Thy stars shall glitter o’er the brave:
    When Death, careering on the gale,
    Sweeps darkly round the bellied sail,
    And frighted waves, rush wildly back,
    Before the broadside’s reeling rack.
    Each dying wanderer of the sea
    Shall look at once to heaven and thee,
    And smile to see thy splendors fly
    In triumph o’er his closing eye.

    Flag of the free heart’s hope and home,
      By angel hands to valor given!
    Thy stars have lit the welkin dome,
      And all thy hues were born in heaven.
    Forever float that standard sheet!
      Where breathes the foe but falls before us,
    With Freedom’s soil beneath our feet,
      And Freedom’s banner streaming o’er us!

    Fitz Greene Halleck wrote the last four lines of this poem.


BATTLE HYMN OF THE REPUBLIC.

This beautiful song, which is set to the tune of “John Brown,” was
written by Julia Ward Howe in 1861 just after her escape from a rebel
raid when witnessing, with friends, a review of troops near Washington.
In her dreams she was inspired by the beautiful thoughts and she
immediately arose, and hastily noted them down.

It is considered one of the grandest battle hymns of the Republic and
has been a favorite with several of our presidents.


BATTLE HYMN OF THE REPUBLIC.

  Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord!
  He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored;
  He hath loosed the fateful lightning of His terrible, swift sword,
          His truth is marching on!

  I have seen Him in the watchfires of a hundred circling camps,
  They have builded Him an altar in the evening dews and damps;
  I have read His righteous sentence by the dim and flaring lamps,
          His day is marching on!

  There read a fiery gospel writ in burnished rows of steel;
  “As ye deal with my contemners, so with you my grace shall deal!
  Let the Hero, born of woman, crush the serpent with His heel,
          Since God is marching on!”

  He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat!
  He is sifting out the hearts of men before His judgment seat;
  Oh, be swift, my soul, to answer Him! be jubilant, my feet,
          Our God is marching on.

  In the beauty of the lilies Christ was born across the sea,
  With a glory in His bosom that transfigures you and me;
  As He died to make men holy, let us die to make men free,
          While God is marching on.


CHICKAMAUGA.

This beautiful poem was written during the late war with Spain, and is
inserted here, as entwined among the lines there is a sentiment that
appeals to the hearts of the whole people.


CHICKAMAUGA.

    They are camped on Chickamauga!
      Once again the white tents gleam
    On that field where vanished heroes
      Sleep the sleep that knows no dream.
    There are shadows all about them
      Of the ghostly troops to-day,
    But they light the common campfire—
      Those who wore the blue and gray.

    Where the pines of Georgia tower,
      Where the mountains kiss the sky,
    On their arms the nation’s warriors
      Wait to hear the battle cry.
    Wait together, friends and brothers,
      And the heroes ’neath their feet
    Sleep the long and dreamless slumber
      Where the flowers are blooming sweet.

    Sentries, pause, yon shadow challenge!
      Rock-ribbed Thomas goes that way—
    He who fought the foes unyielding
      In that awful battle fray.
    Yonder pass the shades of heroes,
      And they follow where Bragg leads
    Through the meadows and the river,
      But no ghost the sentry heeds.

    Field of fame, a patriot army
      Treads thy sacred sod to-day!
    And they’ll fight a common foeman,
      Those who wore the blue and gray,
    And they’ll fight for common country,
      And they’ll charge to victory
    ’Neath the folds of one brave banner—
      Starry banner of the free!

    They are camped on Chickamauga,
      Where the green tents of the dead
    Turn the soil into a glory
      Where a nation’s heart once bled;
    But they’re clasping hands together
      On this storied field of strife—
    Brothers brave who meet to battle
      In the freedom-war of life!
                        —Baltimore News.


THE BON HOMME RICHARD FLAG.

This historic old flag, also known as the Paul Jones Flag, composed of
thirteen bars and but twelve stars, was unfurled by him and borne on
the Bon Homme Richard September 23, 1776, during the action with the
British frigate, the “Serapis,” and is probably the first flag bearing
the stars and stripes ever hoisted over an American vessel of war, and
also the first ever saluted by a foreign naval power.

This flag has been in the family of Mrs. H. R. P. Stafford, of Cottage
City, Martha’s Vineyard, since 1784, and bequeathed by her to the
National Museum at Washington.

But it must be remembered that Washington adopted the flag made by
Betsy Ross five months previous to this.


“THE OLD THIRTEEN.”

A Leaf from Illinois’ History.

In the little city of Shawneetown which is next in age to Kaskaskia,
and consequently the second oldest town in the State, there reposes
a relic of rare value, a genuine flag of Colonial days. It was found
in the attic of the “Posey” building and is supposed to have been
placed there by General Posey, who served under Washington in the
Revolutionary war. The flag is now owned by Mr. Robinson, an eminent
scientist, who for a life-time has taken pains to collect and preserve
many valuable things for Illinois’ posterity to see, especially rare
Indian curios excavated from in and around Shawneetown, which site was
once the pottery of the Shawanee Indians.

The old flag is in rather a good state of preservation although faded
and marred. Its thirteen stars are arranged similar to those on “Paul
Jones’ flag”—in bars, but not horizontal. The rows of stars are placed
diagonally and consist of one, three, five, three and one, which leaves
a star in each corner and five forming the center diagonal. Illinois’
“Old Thirteen” has been framed and covered with glass to preserve it
from the ravages of Time and to save it for the eyes of the children of
coming generations.


COLUMBIA, THE GEM OF THE OCEAN.

    Columbia, the gem of the ocean,
      The home of the brave and the free;
    The shrine of each patriot’s devotion,
      A world offers homage to thee;
    Thy mandates make heroes assemble;
      When liberty’s form stands in view;
    Thy banners make tyranny tremble,
      When borne by the red, white and blue.

    Three cheers for the red, white and blue,
    Three cheers for the red, white and blue,
    Thy mandates make tyranny tremble,
    When borne by the red, white and blue.

This song sometimes goes by the title of The Red, White and Blue. It
was written and composed by David T. Shaw in 1843; later on, however,
it was rearranged by Thomas à Becket, Esq., an Englishman.


HAIL COLUMBIA.

This was written by Hon. Joseph Hopkinson, of Philadelphia, at the
request of a young friend—a theatrical singer whose appeal was for
a patriotic song suitable for the times. England and France were
quarreling and this country was necessarily a good deal agitated.

It was set to the music called The President’s March, which was
composed by Philip Roth, a German, for Gen. Washington’s inauguration
in the City Hall in New York. A great many people were for standing by
our ally, France, but Gen. Washington insisted on strict neutrality;
thus the song was requited to voice this sentiment. It appealed at once
to both parties and charmed every one who heard it—was sung night after
night, audiences joining in the chorus.

    “Hail Columbia, happy land!
     Hail, ye heroes, heaven-born band;
     Who fought and bled in freedom’s cause.
     Who fought and bled in freedom’s cause.
     And when the storm of war was gone
     Enjoyed the peace your valor won;
     Let independence be our boast,
     Ever mindful what it cost,
     Ever grateful for the prize,
     Let the altar reach the skies.“

    Chorus—Firm, united let us be,
            Rallying round our liberty;
            As a band of brothers joined,
            Peace and safety shall we find.

    “Immortal patriot, rise once more,
     Defend your rights, defend your shore;
     Let no rude foe with impious hand,
     Let no rude foe with impious hand,
     Invade the shrine where sacred lies
     Of toil and blood the well-earned prize,
     While offering peace, sincere and just,
     In heaven we place our manly trust
     That truth and justice shall prevail,
     And every scheme of bondage fail.”—Cho.


DIXIE.

    Southrons, hear your country call you!
    Up, lest worse than death befall you!
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie.
    Lo, all the beaconfires are lighted,
    Let all hearts be now united,
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie.

      Chorus—
    Advance the flag of Dixie!
    Hurrah! Hurrah!
    For Dixie’s land we’ll take our stand,
    To live or die for Dixie!
    To arms! To arms!
    And conquer peace for Dixie!
    To arms! To arms!
    And conquer peace for Dixie!

    Hear the northern thunders mutter!
    Northern flags in south wind flutter!
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!
    Send them back your fierce defiance,
    Stamp upon the cursed alliance;
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!

    Fear no danger, shun no labor,
    Lift up rifle, pike and saber!
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!
    Shoulder pressing close to shoulder,
    Let the odds make each heart bolder;
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!

    Swear upon your country’s altar
    Never to give up or falter;
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!
    Till the spoilers are defeated,
    Till the Lord’s work is completed,
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!

    If the loved ones weep in sadness,
    Victory soon shall bring them gladness,
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!
    Exultant pride soon banish sorrow;
    Smiles chase tears away to-morrow;
      To arms! to arms! to arms in Dixie!

      Chorus—
    Advance the flag of Dixie!
    Hurrah! Hurrah!
    In Dixie’s land we’ll take our stand,
    To live or die for Dixie!
    To arms! To arms!
    And conquer peace for Dixie!
    To arms! To arms!
    And conquer peace for Dixie!
                        —[Albert Pike.


TERRITORIAL EXPANSION.

Washington took the oath of office as first President of the United
States on the steps of Federal Hall in Wall street, New York city,
April 30, 1789, and for a short time the seat of government was here
before being changed to Philadelphia.

The history of how Alexander Hamilton, the great Secretary of the
Treasury under Washington, made the trade with Jefferson whereby the
present site of the capital was selected is interesting, as showing
that Hamilton, while constructing a powerful centralized government
with skill and ability, as even Jefferson’s biographer admits, cared
little about the location of the capital itself. The Southern States
wanted it on the Potomac; the Middle and Eastern States wished it to
be further north. Hamilton wanted the government to assume the State
debts, brought about by the war. Jefferson and his party were opposed
to it. Hamilton finally secured the support of Jefferson and his
friends in Congress in support of the assumption, while he delivered to
the Jefferson party the location of the capital at Washington. In after
years this was a source of great discomfort to Jefferson, he claiming
to have been duped by Hamilton.


ACQUISITION OF TERRITORY.


LOUISIANA.

In 1800 Napoleon forced Spain to cede Louisiana back to France, after
thirty-seven years of ownership. The idea of LaSalle, who had looked
forward to establishing here a new France, was long since forgotten,
but Napoleon, now in the zenith of his power, formed the brilliant
plan of colonizing this great country from the Mississippi to the
Rockies and from the Gulf to the British possessions in the North,
thereby hemming in the United States. Napoleon tried to subdue the
Island of San Domingo, with the idea of using it as an outside base
of supplies, but his troops were terribly slaughtered by the natives,
and the army that he intended to send to Louisiana never came. About
this time Napoleon was busy looking after England, and as after events
proved needed all of his troops at home. He succeeded, however, in
creating great alarm in America. The settlers west of the Alleghenies
were especially disturbed. The Mississippi was practically closed for
navigation, as the Spaniards, who held possession of New Orleans, would
not allow them to bring their products down the river and reship, as
had long been the custom.

President Jefferson appointed James Monroe and Livingston, then our
minister at Paris, to call on Napoleon, and, if possible, purchase West
Florida and New Orleans, the amount to be paid not to exceed $3,000,000.

Napoleon was very much in need of money to conduct his war against
England, and his disastrous attempt to subdue the natives of San
Domingo probably made him decide to offer the whole of Louisiana, which
he did for $15,000,000. This great purchase was consummated by Monroe
in 1803. This was the greatest act of Jefferson’s administration, but
the people bitterly opposed it, claiming that we had no use for the
additional territory. Napoleon said that in selling Louisiana to the
United States “he had placed a thorn where England would some day
feel it.” The acquisition of Louisiana more than doubled the area of
the United States, which was 827,844 square miles, increasing it to
1,999,775 square miles. It constitutes about ten of our largest States
to-day.


FLORIDA.

This State, with all its old traditions, has seen many vicissitudes. It
belonged to Spain from 1565 until 1763, nearly two hundred years, when
Great Britain traded Cuba for it. In 1781, the British were expelled
by Spain and that country again assumed possession of Florida. In a
very few years the inability which Spain has ever shown to properly
govern her Colonial possessions was manifest. A war broke out between
the Spaniards and the Seminole Indians of Florida and soon the whole
State was in a condition of virtual anarchy. Emboldened by their
successes in warfare, the Indians molested the frontier of Georgia. The
Government of the United States then took an action which constituted a
precedent for its action in invading Cuba in the late war with Spain.
It despatched a military force into Florida under command of General
Andrew Jackson. He virtually took possession of Florida and speedily
restored order. His conduct excited much debate in Congress and in the
Cabinet, a strong anti-expansion sentiment developing. The matter was
finally settled by purchasing Florida from Spain for $5,000,000. This
was done in 1819. Emigration poured into the territory from the States
further north and soon the value of Florida as an acquisition to the
country became evident and the anti-expansion sentiment died away. In
1845 Florida was admitted into the Union as a State. In 1861 it seceded
with other Southern States and returned again to the Union in 1868.

It may be pertinent right here to say that when the United States buys
or comes into possession of a tract of land it becomes the property of
the country and is called a Territory, and under the Constitution it is
so treated, without representation in Congress until such time as it is
admitted into the Union and becomes one of the United States.


TEXAS.

This great Territory comprising 370,472 square miles originally
belonged to Mexico. In 1820 Moses Austin, a native of Connecticut,
obtained a grant of land and threw it open to settlement by people from
the United States, mostly the Southern States. In a few years more than
20,000 had settled there and the strong Anglo-Saxon spirit of liberty
began to rebel against the oppressive Mexican rule. In a few years
this feeling burst into an open revolt. Texans met and declared their
independence and formed a Republic and placed an army in the field
under Gen. Sam. Houston. He met the Mexicans under Gen. Santa Anna at
San Jacinto in 1836 and gained a complete victory, thus achieving the
independence of Texas. Next year Texas applied for admission into the
Union but no action was taken by Congress for several years. Meantime
in the north a strong sentiment had developed against the institution
of slavery. The subject was vigorously agitated in the pulpit, in
literature and in public. The Southern people, perceiving the strength
of the opposition to their favorite institution, determined in self
defense to acquire more territory for the sake of the strength
additional votes would give them, and so in 1844 the proposal to admit
Texas came up in Congress in earnest.

No concealment of the underlying purpose was made by the Southern
Congressmen who led the movement. A bitter struggle followed but the
annexationists prevailed and in 1845 the “Lone Star State,” as Texas
had been called, was added to the Union. The South welcomed the new
comer with great demonstrations, but the greetings of the North were
not cordial, for in that section it was clearly understood that a great
extension was given to slave territory.


NEW MEXICO AND ARIZONA.

The vast territory included in these two Territories was acquired
mostly from Mexico in 1848 as one of the terms of the treaty of peace
between the United States and that country made after the war of
1846-47. The war with Mexico was brought about by the refusal of the
Mexican Government to concede the claims of Texas to land between
the Rio Grande and the Nueces Rivers. The actual rights in the case
were somewhat obscure, but war was eagerly undertaken by the Southern
people, who believed that a further extension of slave territory
would be the ultimate result. The North was less enthusiastic, for
this reason, but sent a quota of troops into the field before whose
valor, directed by commanding officers who later became prominent in
the great war of the Rebellion, the Mexican armies were defeated. The
United States paid Mexico $15,000,000 for the territory ceded under
the treaty and in addition paid $3,500,000 in settlement of the claims
of private individuals. The boundary line remained in dispute for
five years more, until 1853, when James Gadsden negotiated a treaty
with Mexico settling all questions. Under its terms the United States
gained the Mesilla Valley, forming the southern part of what is now New
Mexico and Arizona, and comprising 20,000,000 acres. The United States
paid Mexico $10,000,000 for this land which was afterwards known as
the Gadsden purchase and is so marked on the larger maps issued by the
Interior Department at Washington. Including the territory acquired by
the Mexican war, the State of Texas and that included in the Gadsden
purchase, the whole area is sufficient to make one hundred and seventy
States the size of Connecticut.


CALIFORNIA.

This great State was ceded to us by Mexico, being part of that country
before the war. In 1848 gold was discovered by Capt. Sutter in a river
near Sacramento. On examination gold was found to occur in abundance.
News of the wonderful discovery drew an immense emigration into
California from all parts of the world, the majority of those traveling
across the plains by the way of the Isthmus of Panama being, of course,
from the United States. The people who poured into the golden State
lost no time in applying for admission into the Union. In 1849, one
year after Sutter’s discovery, the State presented itself at the door
of Congress. In 1850 California was admitted. The celerity of the
operation was due to the fact the North recognized, that California
would offset to an extent the growth of slave territory actually made
by the admission of Texas and threatened in Arizona and New Mexico,
areas peculiarly adapted by climate and other conditions to the
institution of slavery.

Oregon, Washington and Idaho were part of what was called the great
Oregon country. They were acquired under an agreement with Great
Britain in 1846. The United States claimed the territory up to the
parallel of 54° 49′, but a compromise was made and the 49th parallel
accepted as the dividing line between the United States and the British
possessions. The country north of the line is now known as British
Columbia.


ALASKA.

Alaska, whose area is equal to about 120 States the size of
Connecticut, became the property of the United States in 1867 by
purchase from Russia. The sum paid for it was $7,000,000. The purchase,
negotiated by Secretary of State Seward, was denounced by many as
an extravagant use of public funds because Alaska appeared to be
practically worthless. The Government, however, unheeding the kind
of criticism paid $200,000 in addition to the first price named to
extinguish the rights of various commercial companies and thus acquired
a clear title. It was soon found the supposed ice bound land was full
of wealth in fisheries and lumber, the income from seal fisheries alone
amounting in one year to $2,500,000. Alaska’s wealth in gold was,
however, not suspected until recent years and not demonstrated until
the summer of 1896, when the now famous treasure ship arrived in San
Francisco having on board over $600,000 in gold, the property of 50
prospectors who had washed it out of the bars of the creeks emptying
into the Yukon river. Alaska, the “ice bound, inhospitable desert of
the north,” as it was designated in 1868, was a Mecca for the world for
the next few months and thousands braved the dangers of Chilkoot pass
to search for the yellow metal, and at this time it is estimated over
50,000 people are in that part of the Territory which two years ago was
practically uninhabited.


GENERAL GRANT ON EXPANSION.

President Grant in his second inaugural address, March 4, 1873, thus
expressed himself: “I do not share in the apprehension held by many as
to the danger of governments becoming weakened and destroyed by reason
of their extension of territory. Commerce, education and rapid transit
of thought and matter by telegraph and steam have changed all this.
Rather, I believe that our Great Maker is preparing the world, in his
own good way to become one nation, speaking one language, and when
armies and navies will no longer be required.”


HAWAII, CUBA, PORTO RICO, AND THE PHILIPPINES.

These great and interesting acquisitions to our territory have not yet
entered the blue field of our flag. To a great nation and to a humane
people they will look for that protection which has been pledged to
them; and if it is decided that these people shall live under our
starry flag, no one can look back over its history and doubt the
strength and breadth of its folds.


THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI.

This historic and patriotic order was named after the famous Roman
Dictator and Patriot, Cincinnatus, and was founded in May, 1783, on
the banks of the Hudson, by the American and French officers who had
gathered there at the close of the Revolutionary war.

The resolution adopted at the forming of the society contained these
words: “To perpetuate, therefore, as well the remembrance of this vast
event as the mutual friendships which have been formed, of common
danger, and, in many instances, cemented by the blood of the parties,
the officers of the American Army do hereby, in the most solemn manner,
associate, constitute and combine themselves into one society of
friends to endure as long as they shall endure, or any of their eldest
male posterity, and in failure thereof the collateral branches who may
be judged worthy of becoming its supporters and defenders.”

Owing to the great distances between the different States, and the fact
that at that time the means of transportation were slow and uncertain,
it was deemed best to form societies in each of the thirteen States.
This was done. One was also organized in France under the patronage of
Louis XVI.

The original members included the names of Washington, Greene,
Hamilton, Lafayette, Rochambeau, and Paul Jones; in fact, all the
historic military and naval characters of the Revolution. Among the
honorary members elected for their own lives only were the names of
many signers of the Declaration of Independence.

On the pages of the country’s history appears no darker spot than
that placed there by the Congress of the United States in its failure
to give its soldiers the promised half pay for their services, forcing
them to leave their homes and emigrate to the wild lands west of the
Alleghenies, which were given to them in lieu of money. On this account
several of the orders in the different States went out of existence.

The patriotic societies of the country, the names of which are given
here, were all formed for the purpose of perpetuating the memory of
events and of the men who in military, naval and civil positions of
high trust and responsibility, “kept step to the music of the Union.”

The preservation of historical records and manuscripts and the
promoting of fraternal intercourse among their members are the main
inspirations of all of these patriotic societies:

Society of Colonial Wars.

Sons of the Revolution.

Society of the Sons of the American Revolution.

Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States.

Grand Army of the Republic.

Sons of Veterans U. S. A.

There are three great patriotic societies, organized by the women of
America, known as the Daughters of the Revolution, Colonial Dames, and
the Mayflower, that may outstrip all other societies in the value and
importance of their work.


DATES OF ADMISSION OF THE STATES.

    Delaware, Dec. 7, 1787.
    Pennsylvania, Dec. 12, 1787.
    New Jersey, Dec. 18, 1787.
    Georgia, Jan. 2, 1788.
    Connecticut, Jan. 9, 1788.
    Massachusetts, Feb. 6, 1788.
    Maryland, April 28, 1788.
    South Carolina, May 23, 1788.
    New Hampshire, June 21, 1788.
    Virginia, June 25, 1788.
    New York, July 26, 1788.
    North Carolina, Nov. 21, 1789.
    Rhode Island, May 29, 1790.
    Vermont, March 4, 1791.
    Kentucky, June 1, 1792.
    Tennessee, June 1, 1796.
    Ohio, Feb. 19, 1803.
    Louisiana, April 30, 1812.
    Indiana, Dec. 11, 1816.
    Mississippi, Dec. 10, 1817.
    Illinois, Dec. 3, 1818.
    Alabama, Dec. 14, 1819.
    Maine, March 15, 1820.
    Missouri, Aug. 10, 1821.
    Arkansas, June 15, 1836.
    Michigan, Jan. 26, 1837.
    Florida, March 3, 1845.
    Texas, Sept. 29, 1845.
    Iowa, Dec. 28, 1846.
    Wisconsin, May 29, 1848.
    California, Sept. 9, 1850.
    Minnesota, May 11, 1858.
    Oregon, Feb. 14, 1859.
    Kansas, Jan. 29, 1861.
    West Virginia, June 19, 1863.
    Nevada, Oct. 31, 1864.
    Nebraska, March 1, 1867.
    Colorado, Aug. 1, 1876.
    North Dakota and
    South Dakota, Nov. 2, 1889.
    Montana, Nov. 8, 1889.
    Washington, Nov. 11, 1889.
    Idaho, July 3, 1890.
    Wyoming, July 10, 1890.
    Utah, 1894.


DATES OF ORGANIZATION.

    Arizona, Feb. 24, 1863.
    Alaska, July 27, 1868.
    Indian Territory, June 30, 1834.
    Oklahoma, April 22, 1889.
    District of Columbia. March 3, 1791.
    New Mexico, Sept. 9, 1850.

Commodore Perry carried our flag in 1854 into the harbors of Japan, and
the first commercial treaty with that nation was made by and with the
United States.

[Illustration:

GENERAL WASHINGTON   HON GEORGE ROSS   ROBERT MORRIS   BETSY ROSS

                                                        COPYRIGHTED 1883


BIRTH OF OUR NATION’S FLAG.

THE FIRST AMERICAN FLAG ACCEPTED by COMMITTEE and ADOPTED by Resolution
of Congress JUNE 14th, 1777, as the National Standard, was made by
BETSEY ROSS in 1776, at 239 Arch Street, Philadelphia, in the room

represented in this picture. The Committee ROBERT MORRIS and Hon.
George ROSS, accompanied by GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, called upon this
Celebrated Woman, and, together with her suggestions, produced our
beautiful

EMBLEM OF LIBERTY].


SAVE THE OLD FLAG HOUSE.


THE HOME OF BETSY ROSS.

The objects of the American Flag House and Betsy Ross Memorial
Association are to purchase and preserve the historic building,
situated at No. 239 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Pa., in which the
first flag of the United States of America was made by Betsy Ross and
subsequently adopted by Congress, June 14th, 1777, and to erect a
national memorial in honor of this illustrious woman.

All loyal American hearts will welcome the glad tidings that active
steps have been taken to purchase the birthplace of the Star Spangled
Banner, and under the auspices of the American Flag House and Betsy
Ross Memorial Association shall henceforth be preserved as a lasting
tribute to those whose heroism resulted in establishing that freedom
which a united people are to-day enjoying.

Appreciating the importance of preserving this relic of the Revolution,
a number of patriotic gentlemen of this and other States have taken the
matter in hand, thus making the movement national in its scope.

Numerous attempts have been made in the past to remove this historic
building to other cities. The present plans provide that it shall
remain in Philadelphia, where it rightfully belongs, there to be held
in trust for the nation.

It has been left to the option of the American people whether the
birthplace of their national emblem shall be permitted to pass into
oblivion.

This landmark should be the mecca and shrine of the whole nation. It
was associated with one of the most memorable incidents of our early
history, and it is most fitting that it should be preserved for future
generations.

Like “Independence Hall,” wherein the Declaration of Independence
was signed, and Faneuil Hall, the cradle of liberty, it speaks most
eloquently of the men and women to whom we owe our freedom.

While we honor the heroes of the past, let us not forget to preserve
the mementoes associated with them. Such relics increase in value as
they are transmitted from one generation to another and form object
lessons in history.

To follow our flag from its birth until to-day would be to write
a history which stands absolutely alone, and from the day of its
creation to the present time it has never trailed in the dust, being
the only exception among the flags of the world. It is not that we
have not been called upon to defend it and the underlying principles
for which it stands, for to-day as we celebrate the anniversaries of
victories on land and sea we cannot but recall, with mingled pride
and pleasure, the achievements won under its glorious folds, and when
our patriots, inspired by a God-like devotion to flag and country,
performed deeds of daring that mark their efforts as the most signal
ever accomplished under any flag by any heroes of any nation.

With all these glorious deeds, and others that must necessarily follow,
let us as a grateful, patriotic people see to it that the birthplace of
our nation’s flag be preserved as a holy shrine.

With the view of making the movement a popular one, arrangements have
been made to have all Americans, of every shade of religious and
political opinion, affiliate alike, and by their participation to
become the preservers of the birthplace of the “Stars and Stripes.”

On these broad principles souvenir certificates of membership in this
Association will be issued at a nominal price, and the names of all
subscribers placed on the roll of honor.

Any person desiring to see the Old Flag House saved and Betsy Ross
honored may become a member of the “American Flag House and Betsy
Ross Memorial Association” upon the payment of 10 cents, for which
they will receive a beautiful certificate of membership, size 11x14,
duly signed by the officers of the Association, and bearing the seal
and certificate number. Upon these certificates in the centre is
artistically portrayed the room in which Betsy Ross displayed the first
Stars and Stripes to the committee appointed by Congress, consisting of
General Washington, Robert Morris and Hon. George Ross. On the left is
an exterior picture of the Old Flag House as it stands to-day, while
on the right is the picture of the grave of Betsy Ross, at Mt. Moriah
Cemetery.

These certificates will be mailed to any address upon the receipt of
10c.


NOTICE.

A large reproduction, in ten colors, size 22x28 inches, of the original
painting, “Birth of Our Nation’s Flag,” by Charles H. Weisgerber, first
exhibited at the World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893, will be
presented as a souvenir to any person forming a club of thirty members,
inclusive. These premium pictures will not be for sale, and when the
objects of the Association are attained the plates will be destroyed:
thus they will become a valuable family heirloom. For upon them will
be engrossed the name of the individual forming the club, as follows:

    “Presented to ............... of ................
    by the American Flag House and Betsy Ross Memorial
    Association, for aiding in the preservation of the
    Birthplace of our Nation’s Flag, and for the erection
    of a National Memorial in Honor of Betsy Ross, and
    stamped with the seal of the Association.”

The picture referred to above is an exact representation of the
room in which the first American Flag was made by Betsy Ross, which
was subsequently adopted by Congress, June 14, 1777, and is the
only endorsed portrait representation of Betsy Ross by her living
descendants.

Address all communications to

                                        JOHN QUINCY ADAMS, Secretary,
                      Old Flag House, 239 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Pa.



                      
                      *       *       *       *       *

                      
                      
                      
Transcriber’s note:

Obvious punctuation errors were corrected.

Page 20, “foreging” changed to “foregoing” (foregoing papers)

Page 45, “Claypole” changed to “Claypoole” (John Claypoole, a comrade)

Page 65, “one” changed to “two” (nearly two hundred years)

Page 76, “sixe” changed to “size” (membership, size 11x14)





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF OUR FLAG, COLONIAL AND NATIONAL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


