The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pies Made with Pet Evaporated Milk
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pies Made with Pet Evaporated Milk

Creator: Pet Milk Company. Home Economics Department

Release date: May 17, 2021 [eBook #65364]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIES MADE WITH PET EVAPORATED MILK ***

                                  Pies


                     MADE WITH PET EVAPORATED MILK


                                CONTENTS
  Apple                                                               11
  Apple Crumb                                                         13
  Banana Cream                                                         7
  Butterscotch Chiffon                                                10
  Butterscotch Cream                                                  15
  Caramel Custard                                                     12
  Cherry Pie Supreme                                                   8
  Chocolate Chiffon                                                   11
  Chocolate Cream                                                      6
  Chocolate Icebox                                                    13
  Coconut Cream                                                        7
  Coconut Custard                                                      9
  Creamy Peach                                                         6
  Cream Pies, made with packaged mixes                                 5
  Eggnog                                                               9
  Frozen Grape Ripple                                                 11
  Graham Cracker Crust                                                 4
  Lemon Chiffon                                                       12
  Lemon Cream                                                          6
  Lime Chiffon                                                        12
  Maple-Nut Chiffon                                                    7
  Meringue                                                             5
  Pastry                                                               4
  Pecan                                                               15
  Pineapple-Cheese                                                    14
  Plain Custard                                                       12
  Pumpkin                                                             10
  Royal Mince                                                          9
  Strawberry Chiffon                                                   8
  Strawberry Marshmallow                                              14
  Sweet Potato or Squash                                              10
  Tips on Making Fluffy Meringue                                       5
  Tips on Baking Perfect Pastry                                        4
  To Make Tender, Flaky Pastry                                         3
  Whipped Topping                                                     15


The recipes in this book demonstrate the basic principles of making all
types of pies successfully. In addition, some of the recipes show how
the use of Pet Evaporated Milk helps make better cream, custard, and
chiffon pies—at lower cost.

Since Pet Milk is homogenized milk concentrated to double richness, it
is an ideal ingredient for these pies. It takes the place of whipping
cream in chiffon pies, is used as milk in the other types—and, in all
cases, combines rich flavor, creamy texture, with increased milk
nourishment.

In some recipes, too, double-rich Pet Milk takes the place of butter. In
others, it replaces the eggs usually called for ... with perfect
results.

No other form of milk can guarantee such delicious results when used as
an ingredient in pies. Yet Pet Milk costs less generally than any other
form of whole milk.

    [Illustration: “PET” is the registered trademark of Pet Milk
    Company]




                      TO MAKE TENDER FLAKY PASTRY


❶ Measure all ingredients accurately.

a. Flour should be sifted before measuring; then spoon lightly into cup
      and level off with straight edge of knife. Be careful not to pack
      flour down  by shaking or tapping cup.

b. To measure shortening accurately, pack into measuring cup and level
      off with straight edge of knife.

❷ Cut in half of shortening until mixture looks like coarse meal. This
gives _tenderness_ to the crust. Cut in remaining shortening until it is
the size of large peas. This gives _flakiness_ to the crust.

    [Illustration: 2.]

❸ Sprinkle water (a tablespoon at a time) over mixture. Mix lightly with
fork until flour is moistened. Use only enough water to make all of
flour mixture stick together when gently pressed with fork, and “clean
the sides” as it moves around the bowl. Shape dough into a smooth ball.

❹ Sprinkle flour over board or pastry cloth, using only enough to
prevent dough from sticking. Roll with quick, light strokes, working
outward from the center to the edge, keeping crust as round as possible.
Without turning dough, roll out pastry completely on one side to ⅛ inch
thickness. If edges tear, overlap, then roll lightly over the mended
spot to seal. Invert pie pan on dough and cut 1½ inches from rim around
pan. This insures enough dough to fit into pan without stretching.

    [Illustration: 4.]

❺ Fold the dough in half and lift carefully into the pan. Smooth bottom
with finger tips; lift edge and ease in sides. Stretching causes crust
to shrink during baking. Trim so that dough extends about ½ inch beyond
edge of pan. Fold extra dough under until even with pan rim. To flute,
press dough between thumb and forefinger of one hand and forefinger of
the other.

    [Illustration: 5.]

    [Illustration: 5.]

❻ If you use a pastry mix, follow directions on package. Break the mix
up slightly if it has become packed in container. Follow tips (see next
page) when rolling out and placing crust into pie pan.




                     TIPS ON BAKING PERFECT PASTRY


Choose pie pans of oven proof glass for a well-baked, browned
undercrust. Shiny metal does not bake the undercrust as well because it
reflects the heat. Aluminum pans with satiny finish also give good
results.

For a baked pastry shell:

    [Illustration: a.]

a. Pierce all over with fork to permit air to escape and prevent
      blisters.

b. Cool thoroughly before pouring in desired filling.

c. Bake on shelf slightly above center in 425 (hot) oven 12 minutes, or
      until brown.

For two crust pies:

a. Cut several slashes in top crust to let steam escape or top crust
      will puff up leaving a hollow space underneath.

b. Fold edge of upper pastry under lower edge before fluting to keep
      juices from boiling out.

Use a 450 (extremely hot) oven for the first 10 to 15 minutes to brown
the crust and then turn temperature down to 325-350 (moderate) for
remainder of cooking time.




                                 PASTRY


                                                  ONE CRUST    TWO CRUST
                                                     PIE          PIE

 Sift together into bowl     sifted all-purpose  1 cup        2 cups
                             flour
                             salt                ½ teaspoon   1 teaspoon
 Work into flour with fork   shortening          ⅓ cup        ⅔ cup
 or pastry blender ½ of
 When mixture has appearance of coarse meal, add the remaining shortening
 and cut until mixture is size of large peas.
 Stir in gradually, a        water               2            ¼ cup
 tablespoon at a time                            tablespoons
 Roll on lightly floured board to about ⅛-inch thickness. Fit loosely
 into 9-inch pan. Fold extra pastry under and pinch with fingers to flute
 edge. Proceed as directed in desired pie recipe.




                          GRAHAM CRACKER CRUST


  Mix together     1¼ cups fine graham cracker crumbs[1]
                   ⅓ cup melted butter or margarine
  Press firmly with back of spoon in bottom and on sides of 9-inch pie
  pan. Chill until needed.


[1]Sixteen 2½-inch crackers will make 1¼ cups crumbs.




                     TIPS ON MAKING FLUFFY MERINGUE


1. Use large fresh eggs and let the egg whites warm to room temperature
before beating them.

2. Spread meringue on pie filling to edges of crust. Then the meringue
won’t pull away from the crust as it bakes.

3. Bake meringue at 400 on center rack of oven for 7 to 8 minutes.

4. Meringue should be cooled slowly. A draft causes meringues to shrivel
and form little beads of syrup on top.

5. Meringue will not stick to knife, if knife is dipped into water
before cutting pie.




                       MERINGUE (See tips above)


  Turn on oven and set at 400 (hot).
                                8-INCH PIE           9-INCH PIE
  Beat until stiff but not dry  2 egg whites         3 egg whites
  Beat in gradually             4 tablespoons sugar  6 tablespoons sugar
  Spread on top of desired pie filling. Bake on center rack of oven for 7
  to 8 minutes at 400 or until light brown. Cool thoroughly before serving.




 CREAM PIES (Made with packaged mixes which are not the “instant” kind)


Chocolate Cream

  Mix in a saucepan               1 pkg. chocolate pudding powder
                                  (not the “instant” kind)
                                  2 egg yolks
  Stir in gradually until         1 cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  smooth a mixture of
                                  1 cup water

Cook and stir over medium heat until mixture comes to a boil and is
thickened, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat.

Cover and cool thoroughly. Put into a cold 8-inch baked pastry shell
using pie crust mix (follow directions on package, to make crust).
Spread with Meringue (see above). Bake as directed. Cool thoroughly. Cut
with wet knife.

Butterscotch Cream: Follow Chocolate Cream Pie recipe using butterscotch
pudding instead of chocolate.

Coconut Cream: Follow Chocolate Cream Pie recipe using coconut cream
pudding powder instead of chocolate.

Banana Cream: Follow Chocolate Cream Pie recipe using vanilla pudding
instead of chocolate.

Put 1 cup sliced bananas into bottom of a cold 8-inch baked pastry
shell. Cover with cooled pudding and spread with Meringue (see above).




                              CREAMY PEACH


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ⅔ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around the edges.
  Drain well and save juice from       2½ cups canned cling peach slices
  Save 12 peach slices to decorate top of pie. Cut rest of slices into
  small pieces.
  Soften in small dish                 1½ teaspoons unflavored gelatin in
                                       ¼ cup juice off peaches
  Set in pan of hot water and stir until gelatin is dissolved.
  Mix until smooth, then add           3-oz. package white cream cheese
  dissolved gelatin.                   (6 tablespoons)
                                       ¼ cup sugar
                                       ½ teaspoon almond flavoring
  Put ice cold milk into a cold bowl and whip with cold rotary beater, or
  electric beater at high speed until fluffy.
  Add and whip until stiff             2 tablespoons lemon juice
  Beat in cheese mixture about ¼ at a time. When smooth fold in cut-up
  peaches.
  Put into chilled 9-inch Graham Cracker Crust (page 4). Decorate top
  with sliced peaches and maraschino cherries. Chill at least 3 hours.




                            CHOCOLATE CREAM


  Mix thoroughly in a saucepan         ¾ cup sugar
                                       2 tablespoons cornstarch
                                       6 tablespoons cocoa
                                       ½ teaspoon salt
                                       3 egg yolks
  Stir in gradually until smooth a     1 cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                       1 cup water
  Cook and stir over low heat until thickened, about 10 minutes.
  Remove from heat and stir in         1½ teaspoons vanilla
  Cover and cool thoroughly. Put into a cold 9-inch baked pastry shell.
  Spread with Meringue (page 5). Bake as directed. Cool thoroughly before
  cutting with wet knife.




                              LEMON CREAM


  Mix thoroughly in a saucepan              ¾ cup sugar
                                            3 tablespoons cornstarch
                                            ¼ teaspoon salt
                                            1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
                                            3 egg yolks
  Stir in gradually until smooth a          ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                            ¾ cup water
  Cook and stir over low heat until thickened, about 10 minutes.
  Remove from heat and stir in gradually    ⅓ cup lemon juice
  Cover and cool thoroughly. Put into cold 9-inch baked pastry shell.
  Spread with Meringue (page 5). Bake as directed. Cool thoroughly before
  cutting with wet knife.




                              BANANA CREAM


  Mix thoroughly in a saucepan              ⅔ cup sugar
                                            3 tablespoons cornstarch
                                            ¼ teaspoon salt
                                            3 egg yolks
  Stir in gradually until smooth a          1 cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                            1 cup water
  Cook and stir over low heat until thickened, about 10 minutes.
  Remove from heat and stir in              1 teaspoon vanilla
  Cover and cool thoroughly.
  Put in the bottom of a cold 9-inch        1½ cups sliced, ripe bananas
  baked pastry shell
  Cover bananas with cooled custard. Spread with Meringue (page 5). Bake
  as directed. Cool thoroughly before cutting with wet knife.




                           MAPLE-NUT CHIFFON


  Soften in small pan                  1½ teaspoons unflavored gelatin in
                                       3 tablespoons cold water
  Set in pan of hot water and stir until gelatin is dissolved.
  Stir in slowly a mixture of          ⅓ cup sugar
                                       1 cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       ¾ teaspoon maple flavoring
  Chill until almost firm.
  Meanwhile, melt in skillet           1 tablespoon butter or margarine
  Add and stir over medium heat        ½ cup finely cut nuts
  until light brown
  Remove from heat and cool to room temperature. Whip chilled milk
  mixture with cold rotary beater, or electric beater at high speed,
  until light and fluffy. Fold in nuts. Put into chilled 9-inch Graham
  Cracker Crust (page 4). Chill 3 hours. Keep chilled until served.




                             COCONUT CREAM


  Mix thoroughly in a saucepan         ½ cup sugar
                                       3 tablespoons cornstarch
                                       ¼ teaspoon salt
                                       1 cup shredded coconut
                                       3 egg yolks
  Stir in gradually until smooth a     1 cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                       1 cup water
  Cook and stir over low heat until thickened, about 10 minutes.
  Remove from heat and stir in         1½ teaspoons vanilla
  Cover and cool thoroughly. Put into cold 9-inch baked pastry shell.
  Spread with Meringue (page 5).
  Sprinkle over top                    ½ cup shredded coconut
  Bake as directed for Meringue (page 5). Cool thoroughly before cutting
  with wet knife.




                           STRAWBERRY CHIFFON


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around edges.
  Mash with a fork or pastry blender   2 cups fresh strawberries[2]
  Add to berries and mix well          ⅓ cup sugar
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
  Let stand until needed.
  Mix and stir until dissolved         1 package lemon gelatin
                                       1¼ cups boiling water

Cool to room temperature, then add strawberry mixture. Chill until
thick, but not firm.

Put ice cold milk into a cold bowl and whip with cold rotary beater, or
electric beater at high speed, until stiff. Fold in chilled gelatin
mixture. Put into chilled 9-inch Graham cracker crust (page 4). Chill 3
hours. Keep chilled until ready to serve.


[2]Frozen strawberries can be used. Drain the berries and use the juice
    in place of part of the water. Omit the sugar. Use 1½ cups of
    drained berries.




                           CHERRY PIE SUPREME


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around edges.
  Mix together in a saucepan           3 tablespoons cornstarch
                                       ¾ cup sugar
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
                                       ¼ teaspoon cinnamon (can omit)
  Drain and save juice from            2 cups canned, sour, pitted
                                       cherries (No. 2 can)
  If necessary, add enough water to cherry juice to make 1 cup.
  Stir gradually into cornstarch mixture. Cook and stir over medium heat
  until very thick, about 7 minutes. Cool thoroughly.
  Mix until smooth                     2 tablespoons melted butter or
                                       margarine
                                       1 tablespoon lemon juice
                                       few grains salt
                                       1 cup powdered sugar

Whip ice cold milk with cold rotary beater, or electric beater at high
speed, until fluffy. Beat in powdered sugar mixture about ¼ at a time.
Do not overbeat.

Add drained cherries to cooled cornstarch mixture and then take out 18
cherries to decorate top of pie.

Put filling into cold 9-inch baked pastry shell. Put whipped mixture
around edge of pie. Decorate with cherries. Chill about an hour before
serving.




                                 EGGNOG


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ⅔ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around the edges.
  Soften in a small bowl               1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin in
                                       ¼ cup cold water
  Mix in top of double boiler          2 well-beaten eggs
                                       ½ cup sugar
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
  Stir in gradually until smooth a     ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                       ¼ cup water
  Place over boiling water. Cook and stir until mixture thickens slightly
  or about 3 minutes. Add softened gelatin and stir until dissolved.
  Remove from heat and stir in         2 teaspoons vanilla

Chill until thick, but not firm. Put ice cold milk into a cold bowl and
whip with cold rotary beater, or electric beater at high speed, until
stiff. Fold in chilled gelatin mixture. Put into chilled 9-inch Graham
Cracker Crust (page 4). Sprinkle top with nutmeg if desired. Chill at
least 3 hours.




                              ROYAL MINCE


Turn on oven and set at 450 (extremely hot).

Line a 9-inch pie pan with unbaked pastry.

  Mix in a bowl                        2 eggs
                                       ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       2 tablespoons molasses
                                       ¼ cup sugar
                                       2¼ cups moist mincemeat,
                                       ready-mixed, bulk, or canned

Pour into pastry-lined pan. Bake on center rack of oven 15 minutes.
Reduce heat to 350 (moderate) and bake 30 minutes longer, or until firm.
Serve warm or cold.




                            COCONUT CUSTARD


Turn on oven and set at 350 (moderate).

Line a 9-inch pie pan with unbaked pastry.

  Beat until thick and lemon colored   2 eggs
  Beat in gradually a mixture of       1 cup sugar
                                       2 tablespoons flour
                                       1 teaspoon salt
  Add and beat hard                    ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       2 tablespoons soft butter or
                                       margarine
                                       2¼ teaspoons lemon juice
  Fold in                              1½ cups chopped coconut (4-oz. can)

Pour into pastry-lined pan. Bake on oven rack slightly below center
until browned on top, or about 40 minutes. Cool before serving.




                                PUMPKIN


Turn on oven and set at 375 (high moderate).

Line a 9-inch pie pan with unbaked pastry.

  Mix in a bowl                        ¾ cup brown sugar, lightly packed
                                       1 tablespoon flour
                                       ½ teaspoon salt
                                       2¼ teaspoons pumpkin pie spice
  Add and stir until smooth            1½ cups cooked or canned pumpkin
                                       1½ cups Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       1 slightly beaten egg

Pour into pastry-lined pan. Bake on center rack of oven 45 minutes, or
until firm. Cool before cutting. Serve with Whipped Topping (page 15).

Sweet Potato or Squash: Substitute sieved, cooked or canned sweet
potatoes or mashed, cooked winter squash for the pumpkin in the Pumpkin
Pie Recipe. If you use sweet potatoes, reduce sugar to ½ cup and add 2
tablespoons melted butter or margarine.




                          BUTTERSCOTCH CHIFFON


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around the edges.
  Soften in a small bowl               1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin in
                                       ¼ cup cold water
  Put into a saucepan                  1½ pkgs. butterscotch pudding
                                       powder (not the “instant” kind)
                                       ⅓ cup brown sugar
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
  Stir in gradually until smooth a     ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                       1½ cups water

Cook and stir until mixture comes to a boil and is thickened, about 5
minutes.

Add softened gelatin and stir until gelatin is dissolved. Chill until
cold but not firm.

Put ice cold milk into a cold bowl and whip with cold rotary beater at
high speed, until fluffy.

  Add and whip until stiff    2 teaspoons lemon juice

Beat in cold pudding. Put into prepared chilled 9-inch Graham Cracker
Crust (page 4). Chill 3 hours. Keep chilled until served.




                                 APPLE


Turn on oven and set at 450 (extremely hot).

Line a 9-inch pie pan with unbaked pastry (two crust pie, page 4).

  Put into large bowl                  6 cups pared apples, thinly sliced
  Add a mixture of                     1 cup sugar
                                       1 teaspoon cinnamon
                                       ½ teaspoon salt

With spoon, turn apples gently over to coat with mixture.

Arrange apples in pastry-lined pan. Cover with pastry. (See tips on
pastry, page 4.) Bake on oven rack slightly above center 10 minutes,
then reduce heat to 325 (low moderate) and bake about 50 minutes longer,
or until apples are tender and pastry is brown.




                          FROZEN GRAPE RIPPLE


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator        ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around edges.
  Mix in small bowl                        2 egg yolks
                                           ⅔ cup sugar
                                           ½ teaspoon grated lemon
                                           rind
                                           2 tablespoons lemon juice
  Put ice cold milk into a cold bowl with  2 egg whites
  Whip with cold rotary beater, or electric beater at high speed,
  until fluffy.
  Add and whip until stiff                 3 tablespoons lemon juice
  Beat in egg yolk mixture.
  Fold in with spoon or spatula to make a  3 tablespoons frozen grape
  rippled effect                           juice concentrate (thawed)

Put into chilled 9-inch Graham Cracker Crust (page 4). Freeze until
firm.




                           CHOCOLATE CHIFFON


  Soften in a small bowl               1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin in
                                       ¼ cup cold water
  Mix well in a saucepan               ⅓ cup cocoa
                                       ½ cup sugar
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
  Add and mix well                     2 egg yolks
  Stir in gradually until smooth a     1¼ cups Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                       ¾ cup water
  Cook and stir over low heat until slightly thickened, about 10
  minutes. Add softened gelatin and stir until dissolved. Remove from
  heat. Chill until thick, but not firm.
  Then fold in                         2 stiffly beaten egg whites
                                       1½ teaspoons vanilla

Put into chilled 9-inch Graham Cracker Crust (page 4). Chill at least 3
hours.




                             PLAIN CUSTARD


Turn on oven and set at 350 (moderate).

Line a 9-inch pie pan with unbaked pastry.

  Mix in a bowl                        ½ cup sugar
                                       2 tablespoons cornstarch
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
  Add and beat until well blended      3 eggs
                                       1½ teaspoons vanilla
  Stir in gradually until smooth a     1½ cups Pet Evaporated Milk
  mixture of
                                       1 cup water
  Pour into pastry-lined pan.

Bake on oven rack slightly below center about 55 minutes, or until knife
inserted near edge of custard comes out clean. Cool thoroughly before
cutting.

Caramel Custard: Make filling for Custard Pie. Sprinkle over bottom of
unbaked pastry a mixture of ½ cup brown sugar and ⅛ teaspoon cinnamon.
Pour custard mixture over top of sugar in pastry-lined pan. Bake as
directed above for Custard Pie.




                              LIME CHIFFON


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ⅔ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around the edges.
  Mix well in a saucepan               6 tablespoons sugar
                                       1 tablespoon flour
  Add and mix well                     2 eggs
  Stir in gradually until smooth       ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       ½ cup water
                                       2 tablespoons grated lime rind
                                       ¼ teaspoon salt
  Cook over low heat until slightly thickened, about 10 minutes,
  stirring all the time. Remove from heat.
  Add and stir until dissolved         1 package lime gelatin
                                       ¼ cup lime juice
  Chill until thick, but not firm. Put ice cold milk into cold bowl and
  whip with cold rotary beater, or electric beater at high speed, until
  fluffy.
  Add and whip until stiff             2 tablespoons lime juice

Slowly beat in gelatin mixture. Put into chilled 9-inch Graham Cracker
Crust (page 4). Chill at least 3 hours.

Lemon Chiffon: Substitute lemon gelatin, lemon juice and lemon rind for
the lime ingredients.




                              APPLE CRUMB


Turn on oven and set at 375 (high moderate).

  Mix in a 2-quart mixing bowl         ½ cup sugar
                                       2 tablespoons cornstarch
                                       ⅛ teaspoon salt
                                       ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  Stir in a mixture of                 ½ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       1 tablespoon lemon juice
  Add and mix well                     4 cups sliced, pared apples

Pour into 9-inch pie pan lined with unbaked pastry, made with pie crust
mix or from Pastry recipe (page 4).

Bake on rack near center of oven for 30 minutes.

  Meanwhile, put into a small bowl     ⅔ cup brown sugar
                                       ½ cup sifted, all-purpose flour
                                       3 tablespoons butter or margarine

Blend with fork or pastry blender until mixture has the appearance of
fine corn meal.

At end of 30-minute baking period sprinkle brown sugar mixture on top of
pie. Bake pie 20 minutes longer, or until crumb topping is brown. Serve
warm or cold.




                            CHOCOLATE ICEBOX


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill until ice crystals begin to form around the edges.
  Put into a heavy quart saucepan      ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                                       ⅓ cup cocoa
                                       24 marshmallows, cut into pieces
  Cook over very low heat, stirring all the time, until marshmallows are
  melted.
  Remove from heat and add             1½ teaspoons vanilla

Chill until mixture begins to thicken.

Put ice cold milk into a cold quart bowl. Whip with a cold rotary beater
by hand, or with electric beater at high speed, until fluffy.

Fold into chilled chocolate mixture. Put into chilled 9-in. Graham
Cracker Crust (page 4).

Chill until firm, about 3 hours. Keep chilled until ready to serve. To
garnish, cut 4 marshmallows into thirds. Place pieces around edge of
pie.




                         STRAWBERRY MARSHMALLOW


  Put into ice tray of refrigerator    ⅔ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Chill milk until ice crystals begin to form around the edges.
  Put into a quart saucepan            32 marshmallows
                                       ⅓ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
  Cook and stir over low heat until marshmallows are just melted.
  Remove from heat and stir in         1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
                                       ¼ cup lemon juice
                                       ¼ cup water

Chill until slightly thicker than unbeaten egg whites.

Put cold milk into a cold quart bowl. Whip with cold rotary beater by
hand, or with electric beater at high Speed, until stiff. Fold into
marshmallow mixture.

  Fold in                              1 quart sliced, fresh strawberries

Pour into chilled 9-in. Graham Cracker Crust (page 4). Chill until firm,
about 3 hours.




                            PINEAPPLE-CHEESE


 Soften in a small bowl        1 tablespoon unflavored gelatin in
                               ¼ cup cold water
 Mix together in a saucepan    ¼ cup sugar
                               2 slightly beaten egg yolks
                               1 teaspoon grated lemon rind
                               2 tablespoons lemon juice
                               ½ cup drained, crushed pineapple (9-oz. can)
                               ⅓ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
 Cook over low heat until slightly thickened, about 10 minutes, stirring
 all the time. Add softened gelatin and stir until dissolved. Remove from
 heat.
 Stir in                       1 cup cottage cheese, pressed through sieve
 Chill until mixture is thick, but not firm.
 Beat until stiff, but not dry 2 egg whites
 Beat in gradually             ½ cup sugar
                               ⅛ teaspoon salt
 Beat in pineapple-cheese mixture. Put into prepared chilled 9-inch Graham
 Cracker Crust (page 4).
 Sprinkle with                 3 tablespoons graham cracker crumbs
 Chill at least 3 hours.




                                 PECAN


Turn on oven and set at 375 (high moderate).

Line a 9-inch pie pan with unbaked pastry.

 Put into bowl                 ¼ cup soft butter or margarine
 Add gradually, mixing until   ¾ cup sugar
 light and fluffy
 Beat in one at a time         3 eggs
 Add                           1 cup dark corn syrup
                               ¾ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
                               2 tablespoons flour
                               ½ teaspoon salt
                               ¾ teaspoon vanilla
                               1 cup finely cut pecans

Mix thoroughly. Pour into pastry-lined pan. Bake on center rack of oven
50 minutes, or until firm. Cool before serving.




                           BUTTERSCOTCH CREAM


 Mix thoroughly in a saucepan  1 cup brown sugar, lightly packed
                               3 tablespoons cornstarch
                               ¼ teaspoon salt
                               3 egg yolks
 Stir in gradually until       1 cup Pet Evaporated Milk
 smooth a mixture of
                               1 cup water
 Add                           2 tablespoons butter or margarine
 Cook and stir over low heat until thickened, about 10 minutes.
 Remove from heat and stir in  ¾ teaspoon vanilla

Cover and cool thoroughly. Put into cold 9-inch baked pastry shell.
Spread with Meringue (page 5). Bake as directed. Cool thoroughly before
cutting with a wet knife.




                            WHIPPED TOPPING


 Chill in ice tray until       ⅓ cup Pet Evaporated Milk
 almost frozen around edges
 Then put into small cold      4 teaspoons granulated sugar
 bowl with
 Whip with cold rotary beater by hand, or with electric beater at high
 speed, until fluffy.
 Add and whip until stiff      ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
                               2 teaspoons lemon Juice

Serve as a topping on fruit, fruit shortcakes, plain cake, puddings, or
other desserts. Makes 1 cup.


                       Home Economics Department
                            PET MILK COMPANY
                            Arcade Building
                          St. Louis, Missouri

                                                    1160 Litho in U.S.A.

    [Illustration: Wraparound cover]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PIES MADE WITH PET EVAPORATED MILK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


