The Project Gutenberg eBook of Scriptural and Hieroglyphic Observations which were foretold in the years of 1750 & 1792
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Scriptural and Hieroglyphic Observations which were foretold in the years of 1750 & 1792

Author: Francis Moore

Release date: April 25, 2018 [eBook #57048]

Language: English

Credits: Transcribed from the 1812 S. Holemberg edition by David Price


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCRIPTURAL AND HIEROGLYPHIC OBSERVATIONS WHICH WERE FORETOLD IN THE YEARS OF 1750 & 1792 ***


Transcribed from the 1812 S. Holemberg edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                        [Picture: Pamphlet cover]





                                SCRIPTURAL
                                   AND
                        Hieroglyphic Observations


                         _which were foretold in_
                               THE Years OF
                               1750 & 1792.

                                    By
                             _Francis Moore_
                         alluding to the present
                                  TIMES.

                  _To which is added a singular Account_
                    _of the Emigration of the Jews in_
                                  1812.

                                * * * * *

         Published by S. Holemberg No. 14 Belton St. Long Acre &
               Sold by McTOZER, Chapel Place, Duke Street.
                         — St. Georges Fields. —
          And Sold by all the Booksellers in the United Kingdom.

                              _PRICE_ _2d_.

                                * * * * *




POPES OF ROME.


   ONCE on a time Rome’s Church had lost her Head,
   Princes and Cardinals in no Pope agreed;
   At length the wearied Faction, with one voice,
   To Card’nal _Dossa_ left the sacred choice:
   He nam’d himself, defeated all their hopes,
   And taught ’em a new way of making Popes.
   _Urban_ and _Clement_ did the world divide;
   Scarce forty years could the dark right decide:
   Councils and Card’nals both their titles damn’d,
   And _Alexander_ a third Pope was nam’d.
   Where, all this while, was Rome’s unerring Guide?
   Did he in none, or in all three reside?
   If Popes be doubtful, who can their priesthood trust?
   For if they fail, their long succession must;
   Since then false Popes, as well as true ordain’d,
   How can Rome’s holy orders be maintain’d?
   St. _Peter_ could no successor declare;
   _Clement_ he nam’d; but _Linus_ took the chair;
   We find some priests to gain the sacred chair;
   They can usurp, kill, poison, yet not err.

                                * * * * *

       _Printed by J. Briscoe_, _Junior_, _Angel-Street_, _London_.




PROPHECIES.


THE SPIRIT OF GOD is now performing great wonders in all nations, in
order to bring about the great work of reformation; and that it is the
opinion of many good Christians, that the call of the Jews will be in
this age, and that too very suddenly; and that it is very probable, from
a numerous train of deductions, that in this very year, 1750, we may
expect some more than ordinary appearances and motions in most parts of
the world, especially in the Northern and Eastern parts thereof, tending
to the overthrow and destruction of Antichrist.  “Tidings out of the East
and out of the North shall trouble him, (says Daniel, chap, xi.) yet he
shall come to his end, and none shall help him.”

That the time of the Jews’ restoration and commencement of the Millennium
is near at hand, is certain; whether so near as the time above mentioned,
is as yet uncertain.  But this uncertainty arises from the many
historical, and chronological difficulties to be found among historians;
some authors making the time of the same event sooner, others later.
Archbishop Usher, and other chronologers since his time, place the birth
of CHRIST just four thousand years from the creation.—Scaliger, Petavius,
and some others, not so much; but the Septuagint and Josephus much more;
the like difference in accounts is to be found amongst them in many other
historical facts.

There is a tradition among the Jews, that the world shall continue six
thousand years; (viz.) two thousand years void, two thousand years under
the law, and two thousand years under the MESSIAS; and at the end of this
six thousand years will commence the Millennium, or one thousand years of
rest for the people of GOD, and particularly for his chosen people the
Jews.—Lactantius says wherefore,—because all the works of God were
completed in six days, it is necessary that the world continue in this
state six thousand years; which six thousand years, Cyprian says, are
already almost complete since the devil attacked mankind.  Mr. Whiston
observes, that this notion of a Millennium is universal; and it is
derived from the earliest tradition, both among the old heathen
Philosophers, the ancient Jews, the Apostles, and the primitive Fathers
of the Church, and is an undeniable and most important portion of Divine
Revelation.  In his Sacred History, lately published, Vol. II. p. 343, he
says, that by the exactest chronology, the first six thousand years from
the creation end about A.D. 1766; that is for certain supposed the
beginning of the Millennium, when the Jews will be restored to their own
country, and rebuild their temple, upon the sounding of the Seventh
Trumpet.

A trumpet is the symbol of war; and in the Revelations we find that all
the seven trumpets were to be attended with woes and lamentations; six of
which are already past; and the seventh, which is yet to come, denounceth
the third and last woe.  Under it, the seven vials of GOD’S wrath are to
be poured out, both upon the Eastern and Western Antichrist; that is, the
Turk and Pope.  It is said, Revelations, chap. viii. verse 13, “Woe to
the inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the trumpets that are yet to
sound;” and chap. xv. verse 8, it is said, “No man was able to enter into
the temple till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled;”
which intimateth that the holy city and temple cannot be prepared to
receive the righteous part of mankind, till the power of the Turk and
Pope are both destroyed, or that the seven vials are poured out.

A famous French author, in his account of the non-effusion of the seven
vials, says, the first vial poured on the earth, intends the loss of
church revenues, and so falls upon the worldly interest of Antichristian
men; the second vial, poured upon the sea, which he says is the Papal
kingdom in its greatest extent, which will become as the blood of a dead
_man_; so that every soul which liveth in it shall die; for as fish
cannot live in water turned into blood, neither can mankind any longer
endure the yoke of Popish Priests and Governors; the third vial, which is
poured on the rivers, denotes the destruction of Popish doctrines.  The
fourth vial, which is poured forth on the sun, threateneth the Ottoman
empire and religion.  The fourth _trumpet_ raised that empire, and the
fourth _vial_ shall destroy it.  The fifth vial is poured out on the seat
of the Beast, or the city of Rome, which predicts her destruction.  The
angel represents the Pope’s kingdom as full of darkness, and his subjects
gnawing their tongues through despair.  The sixth vial is poured on the
great river Euphrates; that is, on the great river of the Turks and their
religion; after which there will be nothing to hinder the princes and
people of the East, who shall be enlightened or converted, or the Jews,
who are there dispersed in great numbers, from marching into the West, to
help on the destruction of the Beast.  The seventh and last vial is
poured into the air, and denotes the clearing of all places from the fog
and superstition, and Antichristianism, after which will be manifest the
mystery of God in reuniting all nations, and the kingdoms of this world
will become the kingdom of righteousness.

I have already observed that the precise time when all these mighty
revolutions will happen is doubtful; however, there is no doubt but we
are arrived near to the time of their manifestation, and when the scene
of affairs, both in Asia and Europe, will be very much changed: of this
we are assured from computation of Scripture Prophecy, and the concurrent
testimonies of the Sybils and other heathen oracles, the signs whereby
you may know when will be the end of all these things that shall happen
on the earth; (viz.) when (the likeness of) swords shall be seen in the
heavens towards sun-rising or sun-setting; and the prophet Joel says
(chap. ii. verse 30,) “The LORD will shew wonders in the heavens, blood,
and fire, and pillars of smoke.”  Every body knows that upon the first
appearance of the Northern Lights, {7} they were by all sorts of people
compared to swords, lances, and other military weapons, or else to blood,
fire, and pillars of smoke, in the very expressions of the prophet Joel;
and indeed they do greatly resemble all these things; and in fact are
fires and pillars of smoke, or vapour, which do frequently in their
colour represent blood, and by their form and motion, swords, lances, and
other military ensigns; but these appearances, (as also Comets) you will
say, may be accounted for, from natural causes—Allowed, they may so; yet
as their appearances are so universal, and uncommon (except of late
years) and are exactly such as we see were to happen some short time
before the commencement of these extraordinary revolutions, preparatory
to the Millennium, we may and ought to look upon them as ominous, and
sent in a peculiar and wonderful manner, to presage the approach of those
wonderful and tremendous times.  Let us then not be ignorant of the signs
of the times, but look suddenly for that great and fearful earthquake
mentioned in the Revelations; for it will come, and cannot be far off;
but I fear it is with us as with the Jews when our Saviour came into the
world, or with the Christians when Antichrist stept upon the stage.
Christ was both come and gone before the Jews knew that he was the
Messias; and Antichrist was grown old in the world before the world took
any notice of him; so it may be, that Antichrist is going apace to
perdition, before the people of God begin to discern it.

There seems to be such a concurrence of causes and predictions centring
in this time, that it looks very much like the approach of those days
before spoken of, out of divine writ.  To those before mentioned, I will
add part of a prophecy, as it is given us by the author of the Turkish
Spy, who says that he met with a person at Astracan, called the
Travelling Jew, who positively asserted in the open streets, that after
the year 1700, the Turks shall overflow Christendom like a mighty
torrent, when there will be a great desolation in Hungary, Germany,
France, and other regions in the West; but above all others, Italy will
be made a perfect wilderness; that England shall become the refuge of all
that escape the calamities overwhelming the adjacent countries; and there
(he says) they will be shewn a new pattern of the Law of JESUS, or rather
the old and true one, freed from the corruptions and errors which have
been superinduced for many ages, when the Jews will be convinced of their
infidelity, and chase away darkness and superstition from the earth.  In
those days (says this Jew) foreign princes shall send their ambassadors
to the king of Great Britain for holy and pious teachers to instruct
them.  Mighty armies shall be raised in the North, which shall be joined
by a prodigious army, collected in other parts of Christendom, which
shall drive out the Turks, recover from them the Holy Land, and
gloriously rebuild the city of Jerusalem, and make a worthy and excellent
Englishman Patriarch of the same.  Then shall the eyes of us Jews (says
he) be opened; and we shall all acknowledge JESUS to be the true MESSIAS.

MOORE in his observations says, that these times look something like a
preparation for the destruction of Antichrist.  We know his destiny is
near at hand; and it is with good reason expected, that great advances
will be made towards that good work this very year (viz.) 1750.

The Turks have a traditionary prophecy among them which says that they
are at last to be destroyed by a Northern nation, which have a white and
yellow hair.

The pious Archbishop Usher was of opinion, that the last persecution
would fall upon all the Protestant churches in Europe, but with this
difference: in the former, the most eminent Ministers and Christians did
generally suffer; but in this last persecution, these shall be preserved
by God; which shall immediately follow as soon as the storm is over,
which shall take away the hypocrites and formal professors of
Christianity.




STATE OF THE WORLD IN 1792.


   Perfidious Mars long plighted leagues divides,
   And o’er the wasted world in triumph rides;
   The peaceful peasants to the war are prest,
   The fields lie fallow in inglorious rest,
   The plain no pasture to the flock affords,
   The crooked scythes are straighten’d into swords;
   Now impious arms from ev’ry part resound,
   And, like a deluge, cover all the ground.

The time does not yet appear arrived when the nations of the world shall
learn war no more, nor beat their swords into plowshares, nor their
spears into pruning hooks.

“How pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!” was the
observation of the Psalmist of old.  And the command of the great
Lawgiver is, “Hear, O Israel; the Lord thy God is one Lord:” and “Thou
shalt love the Lord with all thy heart, and with all thy strength, and
with all thy mind, and with all thy soul; and the second is like unto
this: thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”  Was this practical
truth observed more, we should then soon see what most people are so
earnestly desiring; namely, better times; the world would soon bear
another aspect, and all would be harmony and peace.

The Almighty God of all principalities and powers, by his infinite wisdom
and all-seeing providence, hath intended and proposed, and by these his
glorious and powerful instruments, declares and presignifies such notable
events and transactions, such unexpected commotions and various mutations
to happen to many of the principal kingdoms and nations in the world; for
the affairs thereof seem to be in a hurry and confusion, and to be acted
by such a ferment as is not usual; their passions and fury rise higher;
and the ill success of the advocates of power and tyranny is an
encouragement to the friends of liberty, both civil and religious, to go
on.  In the Eastern part of the world, a nation or country is near being
swallowed up more fatally than Jonas in the whale’s belly.  The Turks are
eminently pointed at by these celestial messengers.  War and desolation
has already invaded their territories.  The Ottoman empire must be
weakened, and Antichrist must be destroyed; France and Italy, more
especially Lorrain and Naples, will meet with new troubles.  New troubles
and misfortunes arise in the North.  The King of P— will suffer by
sickness, or some other calamity; but however he will gain some military
honours and advantages this year.  A great General stoops to fate.  Death
alone convinces us, that all men are vanity.  Some losses or misfortunes
seem to threaten Portugal; and Spain is not past the vortex of ill
fortune.  One loss comes upon the back of another, which at last brings
her to reason, and will pave the way to liberty.  Here now follows one of
Michael Nostrodamus’s Prophecies, which is now fulfilling, or near these
times.

   On the left hand over against Vitry,
   The three Red ones of France shall be watched for;
   All the Red shall be knockt dead, the black not murdered,
   By Britain set up again in security.




MOORE’S OBSERVATIONS.


REASON, certainly, if it is but permitted to employ the powers with which
it is capacitated, not only instructs us that man lives after death, but
also that he lives more; that is, that he then comes into the essence and
spirit of his life, before imprisoned.

_Nam si aspexerit Mars ad Saturno opposito aut quarto tunc convertetur
mundus in bellorum capium_.  Thus writes Avenaris, which, Englished, is,
that when Mars beholds Saturn by opposition, or quartile, the world will
be involved in wars and bloodshed; and this configuration between sullen
Chronus and angry Vulcan we see made this month (viz. August, 1792.)
Opposite appearances also of an exceeding mild and amicable nature
present themselves to our view; there being no less than three friendly
Trines, and three Sextiles also of a pleasing nature, as well as four
Conjunctions, bearing good will to mortals below.

In a prophecy written six or seven hundred years since, taken out of the
library of St. Victor, at Paris, which is to this effect—“Woe to thee,
thou seven-hilled city (Rome) when liberty spreads in France; for then
the fall and destruction of thy mighty men is at hand.  Woe to thee, thou
city of blood; the voice of the scourge, and of warlike horses and
chariots, shall not depart from thee; thy gold is darkened; rust hath
consumed it, and spoiled it; that is, the gold of God’s word is obscured,
and religion is corrupted, &c.

“The Pope’s power will receive a very great shock, civil and religious,
before the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred, or near that
time.”

                                * * * * *

   See winged Time as swift as lightning flies:
   Redeem each moment, and be timely wise.




AN OLD PROPHECY,
PRINTED 1686.


   WHEN New England shall trouble New Spain,
   When Jamaica shall be Lady of the Isles and the Main;
   When Spain shall be in America hid,
   And Mexico shall prove a Madrid;
   When Mahomet’s ships on the Baltic shall ride,
   And Turks shall labour to have ports on that side;
   When Africa shall no more sell out their Blacks,
   To make slaves and drudges to the American tracts;
   When Batavia the Old shall be contemn’d by the New;
   When a new drove of Tartars shall China subdue,
   When America shall cease to send out its treasure,
   But employ it at home in American pleasure;
   When the New World shall the Old World invade,
   Nor count them their lords, but their fellows in trade;
   When men shall almost pass to Venice by land,
   Not in deep water, but from sand to sand;
   When Nova Zembla shall be no stay
   Unto those who pass to or from Cathay,
   Then think strange things are come to light.
   Whereof but few have had a foresight.

                  _From the BEACON_, _October_ 25, 1812.




THE
GATHERING OF THE JEWS,
OR THE
_Approach of the Millennium_.


LETTERS from various parts of Germany state, that great sensations have
been excited among various classes of the inhabitants of Germany by
several preachers having held forth to their congregations that the
approach of the time of the Millennium had arrived, and this doctrine has
been illustrated from the departure of a great number of Jewish families
from different parts of Germany on their way to the Holy Land.  The
following letter from Mr. Niety, a merchant in Riga, has been published,
on this subject:—

    “My son was last summer in the Crimea, and returning towards the end
    of autumn by way of Odessa, he heard a report that many Jewish
    families emigrated through that town.  During his journey through
    Poland, he met himself many travelling Jews.  When he afterwards
    lodged in a town inhabited by Jews, and met there with a German Jew,
    he entered into conversation with him, and asked him, to what country
    the emigrating Jewish families went.  He replied, to Palestine, to
    settle in the country of their Fathers, having a presentiment that
    the Messiah would now soon come.  The rich of the nation, scattered
    in different parts of the world made collections for the journey
    expences of the poor.—This account of my son excited my attention.  I
    wrote to one of our friends at Wilna, as Poland is the chief seat of
    this people, and asked him concerning these movements, and the
    probable causes of them, to which I received, within these few days,
    the following answer:

    “‘I have also received interesting accounts concerning the Jews.
    There is among them a general desire to return to the land of their
    Fathers.  Many of them are probably impelled by need, as there is a
    stagnation of all trade here: but many are moved by the expectation
    of the coming of the Messiah in about eight years.  The same persons,
    from whom I accidentally heard this, told me, on another occasion,
    that fifteen years hence probably no Jew would be left in this
    country.  In the present times of confusion this memorable people,
    scattered in all the world, is little noticed; but if the above
    information is confirmed in process of time, and more generally, that
    impulse among them is certainly one of the remarkable signs of the
    times.’—Thus far from this letter.

    “This intelligence excited my attention; and as I undertook another
    journey to the German colonies in Poland, in the months of May and
    June of 1811, I resolved to ascertain the foundation of these facts.
    In two towns which are inhabited by many Jews, I received from their
    leaders the following account: That it was certainly true, that for
    two years, some hundreds of Jewish families had emigrated from Poland
    into Palestine.  Enquiring into the purpose of their emigration, I
    was answered, that they hoped the promises of the Prophets would now
    soon be accomplished, that the Lord would gather the people of
    Israel, from all parts of the earth, where they were scattered, into
    the lands of their Fathers, and that they would there wait for the
    appearance of the Messiah; for after their Rabbies had often been
    mistaken in fixing the time of his coming, they now were persuaded
    that he would come at length.  When I replied that they might again
    be mistaken, they said—No matter; if those who now go to Palestine
    should not live to see the coming of the Messiah, they, however, are
    gathered in the Holy Land with their Fathers, and whenever the
    Messiah comes, they will be raised from their graves.  The places
    from whence these emigrations are most frequent, they said to be
    Brody in Volhinia, and Wilna in Lithuania.  Though I was led to many
    observations by this statement, yet the proper aim of my journey did
    not permit me to pursue the subject.”

                                * * * * *

                                  FINIS.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

       _Printed by J. Briscoe_, _Junior_, _Angel-Street_, _London_.




FOOTNOTES.


{7}  First appearance of the Northern Lights, 1718.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCRIPTURAL AND HIEROGLYPHIC OBSERVATIONS WHICH WERE FORETOLD IN THE YEARS OF 1750 & 1792 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


