The Project Gutenberg eBook of The New Science of Controlled Breathing, Vol. 2 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The New Science of Controlled Breathing, Vol. 2 (of 2)

Author: Edward Lankow

Release date: April 26, 2020 [eBook #61945]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Charlene Taylor, David E. Brown, and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW SCIENCE OF CONTROLLED BREATHING, VOL. 2 (OF 2) ***

  THE NEW SCIENCE
  OF CONTROLLED
  BREATHING

  The Secret of Strength,
  Energy and Beauty--Through
  Breath Control

  By EDWARD LANKOW

  Leading basso with the Boston, Metropolitan and
  Chicago Opera Companies. World-renowned
  singer and teacher of the new science
  of controlled breathing

  LESSON II

  Controlled Breathing as a Means of Exercise

  CORRECTIVE EATING SOCIETY, Inc.
  47 West Sixteenth Street
  NEW YORK CITY




  Copyright, 1922,
  Corrective Eating Society, Inc.




_LESSON II_

Controlled Breathing as a Means of Exercise


Many theories concerning the art of breathing have been exploited in
recent years. Numerous books dealing with the subject have been offered
to the public. The net results, however, have been unsatisfactory. The
appeal of this propaganda has met with comparatively little response.
The truth as to the importance of right method in breathing may have
been presented, but it has remained valueless, since it has not been
accepted and acted upon by those to whom it was addressed. Perhaps in
great measure the fault lies in the fact that the various advocates of
breath-systems have been too vague in their teachings, have expounded
the theory rather than the practice.

It is for this reason that I have been at pains to describe all
necessary exercises in such detail as to make the practice of them
simple and easy for every reader, I have arranged them in such order
as to make sure a rapid progress toward perfect breath-control, with
its consequent increase in health, beauty, efficiency and happiness.

It seems, indeed, difficult to impress on anybody not familiar with the
wonderful advantages of correct breathing, a full recognition of the
vital bearing breath-control has on the well-being of the individual.
Air is too ridiculously cheap to be much respected by most persons.
And, too, breathing is ordinarily automatic, requiring no thought.
Naturally enough, then, most persons give it no attention, since they
have no realization of its importance.

Nature has provided that all great things should be essentially simple.
It is thus with the process of breathing, which is the chief vital
functioning of the body.

An ancient philosopher has said:

“The more we desire to have that which is superfluous, the more we meet
with difficulties; the more necessary the thing is for living beings,
the more easily it is found and the cheaper it is: air, water and food
are indispensable to man. Air is most necessary, for if man is without
air a few moments he dies, whilst he can be without water a day or
longer. Air is undoubtedly found more easily and is cheaper than water.
Water is more necessary than food, and is proportionately cheaper; and
so on, as to the different kinds of food and luxuries.”

Note well the undeniable fact as asserted by the philosopher, that air
is of the first importance.

If air had to be paid for, or if only a very limited amount were to be
distributed to each consumer, there would be an instant and universal
recognition of its supreme value. Its restriction would compel every
individual to appreciate the unique worth of the true Elixir of Life.


What Mortality Statistics Teach Us

According to statistics of the United States census, the annual death
rate from all causes is one million. Of this number, four hundred
thousand died from diseases of the lungs. The figures demonstrate
that two persons, at least out of every five, come to their death
prematurely--and from a preventable cause.

Another aspect of the truth is gaining wider recognition day by day
throughout the civilized world. This has to do with the appreciation
of fresh air as a fundamental of health. There has been a remarkable
awakening to this effect within a generation. Today, the preferred
treatment of consumptives demands that they shall live out of doors
if possible; the windows in the hospitals are seldom closed; sleeping
porches are built wherever space permits.

It is unfortunately true, however, that there has been little
advancement in general knowledge as to the science, the art, and
practice of correct breathing. Yet, I have been surprised and
gratified by the eager attention of those friends to whom I have made
explanations and given exhibitions during the last few years. Without
an exception, these friends have manifested a keen desire to learn the
secrets of breath-control and to win for themselves the benefits thus
conferred.

In order to broaden my knowledge and to render it exact, I have
made serious studies and experiments through a term of years. I am
convinced that if, instead of gymnasiums, institutions were established
for training in the development of breath-control, the grim death-toll
of one million for one year in our country would dwindle amazingly.


The Gymnastics of Breathing

You must always remember that the correct carriage of the body during
the period of the breathing exercises is a factor of great importance,
since the lungs function variously in accordance with different
postures of the body.

After the fundamental principles of deep breathing are mastered, the
next step is to connect it with different exercises, respectively, of
the arms, the legs, the trunk, and the head. At first it will be found
somewhat difficult to combine attention to the various parts concerned,
but the ability to do this will be readily mastered by practice.

The point involved is that the muscles of the chest have a reflex
action on other muscles. For instance, when the lungs are full of air
all the cells are inflated to the utmost, the chest is stretched, the
diaphragm is drawn down. The various muscles of the chest, of the back
and of the abdomen are in a state of high tension. This tension should
last only during the time in which the breath is held. Moreover, care
must be taken that it shall not influence any other muscles besides
those directly concerned.

When you exercise the arms rhythmically while the breath is being
held, such movement of the arms must not be permitted to influence
the breath. The result to be striven for is an intelligent control
of the muscles, so that the various groups shall be made to act
independently. Every school of gymnastics seeks to attain the same
end--with a difference: In this system of breath-control, the lungs are
trained--the chief requisite for all health, beauty and vigor.

And now that we have given this much of attention to the “Why?” let us
go forward to the “How?” of breath-control.


Preparation for the Exercises

The clothing should be loose, especially around the neck and chest. It
is advisable, when convenient, that the collar should be removed for
the duration of the exercises. The buttons of the coat and vest, too,
should be unfastened. (After a short time it will be found that these
buttons must be placed nearer the edges of the garments.)

The girl or woman who wishes to get the best results from these
exercises should be sure to have no clothing on that may bind her about
the waist, constrict her diaphragm, or press upon her abdominal muscles.

It is almost superfluous to say that she should never attempt her
exercises without, at least, first divesting herself of her corset--if
she wears corsets. It is better to wear merely the comfortable union
suit that so many sensible girls and women now wear. For this affords
perfect freedom of movement and permits every muscle to be properly
tensed and relaxed by the deep breathing exercises, and the gymnastic
movements that accompany them.

The first requirement throughout all the exercises is a preliminary
releasing from the lungs of the old, dead air, which is a continual
source of self-poisoning. This accumulation must be driven out from
the points of the lungs before the new breath is taken. It is repeated
also on the conclusion of all the exercises. It must never be neglected.


The Cleansing Breath

EXPLANATION IN DETAIL

This exercise prefaces and ends every exercise in breathing. By
prefacing an exercise, it makes space in the lungs for a capacity
volume of new breath; by ending an exercise, it serves the important
function of relaxing the whole body. It should be studied very
carefully.

Exhale (blow out) energetically, saying “ss” between the teeth.
Exaggerate the hissing sound of “s”. This protects the throat. While
doing this, bring shoulders and head forward as in Photograph 1 (a).
This helps to press out that air which is never entirely removed from
the lungs. We call this the residual air.

After exhaling all you can, begin the second part of this exercise by
doing the opposite. Inhale slowly through the nose, gradually bringing
the out-stretched arms overhead, performing a circle; also bring head
and shoulders back, filling the lungs in all parts to great capacity.
See Photograph 1 (b). Pause for one or two seconds, and relax suddenly.
This is difficult to do correctly. To relax suddenly means to relax
with a crash--the breath escapes at once, the arms fall, the knees bend
and all this must take place together. With well-opened mouth you say
“Ha!” to help make the breath escape quickly.

This very important sudden relaxation may lack snap and precision at
first, but after a few days the mind will become trained to its action.
After this relaxation take two shorter breaths in the same way then
pause before repeating.


The Cleansing Breath

IN CONDENSED FORM

Position: Erect, with arms at side.

 (a) Exhale (blow out) quickly, saying “ss.” See Photograph 1 (a).

 (b) Inhale through nose, lifting arms to front.

 (c) Hold breath as in position, Photograph 1 (b).

 (d) Exhale suddenly “Ha,” bringing arms down to sides.

 (e) Two short cleansing breaths. Pause ten seconds before repeating.

Ordinarily, do this exercise six to eight times, with pauses between.


The Short Controlled Breath

EXPLANATION IN DETAIL

Exhale first as shown in Photograph 1 (the cleansing breath). This
precedes every exercise.

After the cleansing breath, inhale through the nose, while placing
the hands lightly on hips, as in Photograph 2. Hold the breath a few
seconds and open the mouth. Do not permit any breath to escape. The
opening of the mouth proves to yourself that there is no contraction
at the throat; instead, the diaphragm is holding the breath. Now,
exhale, saying “ss” between the teeth, with relaxed throat. It is very
important to observe that the chest is held high for the first half of
expiration. Then let it quickly sink with the breath, and take two or
three quick cleansing breaths.

Observe that the shoulders do not rise while inhaling--that you really
inhale, not that you stretch the chest muscles and lift the shoulders,
as I have seen even athletes do, when asked to take a deep breath.
Besides opening the mouth during the period of held breath, it would be
well to turn the neck several times to prove its freedom from tension.


The Short Controlled Breath

IN CONDENSED FORM

Position: Erect, with arms at sides.

 (a) Exhale as in Exercise One, saying “ss.”

 (b) Inhale through nose, placing hands on hips as in Photograph 2.

 (c) Hold breath one to four seconds; open mouth.

 (d) Exhale “ss” first holding chest high, then letting it sink slowly
     with breath.

 (e) Two to three cleansing breaths. Pause before repeating.

To be done five or six times with pauses.


The Climax Breath

EXPLANATION IN DETAIL

This exercise is the most difficult of all breathing gymnastics, and
should not be attempted by the sick. It requires great endurance. Even
an athlete should not attempt it, until the others are well in hand.

The first part is exactly like the exercise marked “The Short
Controlled Breath.” But in the second part, instead of expelling the
air suddenly, you proceed to exhale very slowly (after holding the
breath a few seconds). Care should be taken to see that the upper chest
is held high as long as possible while exhaling. With the last atom of
breath leaving the lungs, drop (relax) the shoulders and whole frame.
Quickly take two or three more cleansing breaths to quiet the heart and
lungs.

When one is ready for this strenuous exercise, it becomes a great force
for building breadth and depth to the chest, and new inner vitality.

During the first few weeks one performance of this exercise is enough
for the day. After the second month, two exercises per day, fifth
month, three exercises per day, etc., very gradually increasing the
number.


The Climax Breath

IN CONDENSED FORM

 (a) Exhale “ss.”

 (b) Inhale slowly. “Hiss” through smallest opening of lips and closed
     teeth. Place hands on diaphragm, as in Photograph 3.

 (c) Hold breath several seconds.

 (d) Exhale slowly “ss” through small opening of lips and teeth.

 (e) Several cleaning breaths. =Long= pause.

This is never to be performed more than twice at one time, during the
first two months.

With girls or women who are inclined to stoutness, it may sometimes
be well to place the hands immediately under the busts--slightly
supporting the breasts--instead of on the hips.

It will be found that the “relaxing” movements can thus be performed
with more comfort--until such time as the muscles supporting the busts
gain in strength and elasticity.

Care should be taken at first not to take in too much breath, nor to
hold the breath too long. This matter, however, is entirely individual.
Naturally, a greater amount of care must be exercised by a delicate
child or by a consumptive than by a healthy youth.

And right here it should be emphasized that, if you are a business man,
sitting for long hours every day at a desk, you should, in order to
derive the maximum amount of good from these breathing exercises, plan
to stand up, near the open window and spend a few minutes practicing
some of these simple exercises.

You will often find that what you thought was the fatigue of overwork
is nothing more or less than staying too long in a close atmosphere,
and making an insufficient use of your organs of respiration.

The feeling of freshness these exercises will impart, the increased
vigor and the enhanced clearness of mind that will come to you, will
prove a grateful source of surprise.

Many men, formerly in the habit of visiting for a cocktail, take a few
deep breaths in this scientific manner. They claim that this Fresh Air
Cocktail is better than any coffee or liquor stimulant. And it can be
certain that nothing but good effects can ever follow it.

By this system of breathing you can build up a wonderful physique. You
can become strong and active, and have a superabundance of health and
vitality--and without spending more than a few minutes a day at your
breathing exercises. After a short time the _habit_ for slow, deep
breathing is formed, and as with all habits, it requires no attention
whatsoever.


Hints for Controlled Breathing

It should go almost without saying that to get the _best_ effects from
air you should breathe the purest air obtainable.

Air which is full of dust particles, for instance, may be actually
irritating to the delicate mucous membrane that lines the nose, throat,
bronchial tubes and air cells of the lungs.

This dust contains particles of organic matter derived from the
excrement of horses and dogs, from dried atoms of offal and decaying
vegetable matter, or from dried mud impregnated with urine.

Indeed, it is very largely upon these particles that the
micro-organisms--arch enemies of mankind as well as of animal kind--are
carried on their errand of destruction.

These micro-organisms are most abundant in the air of inhabited
rooms--and the more people in the room the greater the number of
microbes present.

So don’t be afraid of open windows--day or night. Remember Florence
Nightingale’s quaint observation, “Windows are made to be opened.”


Always Breathe Through the Nose

It should be remembered, also, that so far as possible, all inhalation
of air should be through the nose. This is for two very important
reasons.

First, the fine hairs lining the nasal passages act as a sieve through
which the inspired air is strained.

Further than this the lower turbinated bodies in the nose, and the
lower half of the middle turbinates are covered with tiny cells
(ciliated tissue) protruding from the membrane covering of the
turbinates.

These cells catch and hold any particles of dust or other matter that
may have slipped through the hair screen of the nostrils. Thus dust,
germs and other harmful material are removed from the air currents, and
prevented from reaching the lung cells.

The next most important reason is that the chambers of the nose, with
their wonderfully rich blood supply, act as temperature regulators.

If you breathe air at zero temperature through the nose it is actually
warmed to body temperature before it passes into the bronchial tubes.

If you were to breathe desert air, or the air of a blast furnace heated
to 130 degrees--this superheated air would be cooled approximately to
body temperature before it was passed into the lung cells.

If there is a tendency to breathe through the mouth, this will be
manifested most decidedly at night, when you are asleep, and the
muscles are relaxed.

If you find that you are in the habit of sleeping with the mouth
open--awakening in the morning with a dry, harsh throat, it might be
well to adopt the device which Dr. William H. Fitzgerald introduced to
the medical profession almost 20 years ago.

This consists merely in applying a small piece of surgeon’s adhesive
plaster over the closed lips, keeping them closed during all the hours
of the night.

The court-plaster can be applied lengthwise over the lips; or it can
be pasted across the lips, holding them firmly in the closed position.
Many find the latter method the most practical.

The more fresh air you can get in your home, your office or school or
workshop, or wherever you may have to spend your day time--the better
off you’ll be.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Emboldened text is surrounded by equals signs: =bold=.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

References are made in the text to photographs, although no photographs
  appear in the original.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW SCIENCE OF CONTROLLED BREATHING, VOL. 2 (OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


