The Project Gutenberg eBook of Bonanza
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Bonanza
        A story of the outside

Author: John Trevena

Release date: April 21, 2025 [eBook #75921]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Hutchinson & Co, 1901

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BONANZA ***





BONANZA




  BONANZA

  A STORY OF THE OUTSIDE.
  By ERNEST G. HENHAM,
  Author of “Menotah,”
  etc.

  [Illustration]

  London
  Hutchinson & Co.
  Paternoster Row       1901




  PRINTED BY
  COWAN & CO., LTD.
  PERTH




SUMMARY OF CONTENTS


                                                     PAGE

  I. YELLOW SANDS.

    WHERE EARTH AND SKY MET                             9
    THE ADVENTURERS                                    23
    A LAND OF HIDDEN TREASURE                          35

  II. THE LUMBER CAMP OF GULL ISLAND.

    LIFE!                                              49
    SOME HUMAN NATURE                                  61
    AN AFFAIR WITH JAKE PETERSSEN                      75
    THE OLD STONE RUIN OF THE BUSH                     89
    CLERICAL ERRORS                                   101

  III. ON A FRESHWATER SEA.

    MORNING                                           115
    AFTERNOON                                         122
    EVENING                                           131
    SEEKWAH, WHO BLOWS GOOD TO NO ONE                 141
    CAPTAIN CORN WHISKY                               150
    A MAN FOND OF LIFE                                158

  IV. AN UNKNOWN LAND.

    WEIRD HOLLOW                                      175
    MATERIAL GHOSTS                                   190
    AN OLD CAMPAIGNER                                 202
    THE SOONERS OF ELDORADO                           214
    HOW JUSTICE WORKS                                 225

  V. HANAFIN CITY.

    BONANZA                                           237
    DISQUALIFIED                                      253
    THAT PRIEST AGAIN                                 262

  VI. THE NIGHT.

    CAN A LEOPARD CHANGE HIS SPOTS?                   279
    THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED                        290
    WHEN SENTENCE IS GIVEN LET HIM BE CONDEMNED       299

  VII. BONANZA.

    WHERE THE SUN SHINES UPON THE SAND                315




I

YELLOW SANDS




BONANZA




WHERE EARTH AND SKY MET


The time was an evening in the spring when the atmosphere was all red
and gold; the place the flowering grass mounds between the white poplar
and birch beside little Yellow Sands River. I had walked out to haul
up my sturgeon lines, and had reached the thicket of pines on the sand
side of our snake fence, where I could begin to hear the splash of the
waters, when my well-trained ears caught a new and different sound
proceeding from the bush-bound trail. Curiosity led me to intrude, and
I soon came upon a group of Indian maidens at play, pelting each other
with soft green cones, and using their shawls as shields to protect
their faces.

Directly they saw me a mischievous cry went up, and they united forces,
their black eyes dancing with fun as they flung their dainty missiles
in my direction with a pitiless accuracy. Presently I dashed forward
and captured one of the girls, the most audacious, and, incidentally,
the most handsome. She struggled with me, her great beautiful eyes
two imps of laughter, but I held on, and, as a punishment, tried to
force one of the cones into her laughing mouth. The soft scented thing
crumbled upon her teeth; she twisted round, slapped me sharply across
the cheek, and, with another deft twist, freed herself, her black hair
dashing into my face as she escaped.

The other girls stood at a distance, and chaffed at my defeat.

“When did you come?” I called, in the Cree which I knew better than
English, because the girls were strangers to me.

It was Akshelah, my chief tormentor, who replied from the summit of an
ant-mound. The tribe had just come to Yellow Sands from Thunder Lake,
where fish and fur-bearers had become scarce.

“Come with me,” commanded the girl, holding out her brown shapely arms.
“I will take you down to the tepee, and the chief, my father, will give
you some moose.”

“We have lots of moose,” I said. “Come with me, and I will give you a
sturgeon for your father.”

“But the sturgeon is in the river,” said the bright girl, her head to
one side.

“I hope he is pulling at my line,” I said.

Then the girl jumped from the ant-mound, and swung round, catching at
my hand, and so drew me away from her companions.

“I will not walk over those stones,” said she, and I noticed then that
her left foot was tied up. Yet she walked lightly enough beside me,
through the thicket of pines, where some purple butterflies idled, and
down to the yellow sands, where the surface was as soft and yielding as
white moss.

This bright girl was full of talk, and as we walked she told me of the
many things she had done, and all she had seen, the silver fox, the
white bear, and Wepechenite, the walrus, himself.

“One day,” said she very sternly, “I shot a moose myself.”

“I will track a musk-ox for you, and you shall kill that,” I said.

“Perhaps I should be afraid,” said Akshelah, with a quick glance.

“You would not be afraid if I were with you.”

Said she more slowly:

“Perhaps you shall come down and dance with me at the lodge. But where
is your sturgeon for my father?”

Line after line I gathered in out of the amber water, but there was no
sturgeon that evening. When we had visited the last, Akshelah laughed
delightedly.

“A fisherman!” she cried. “Such a fisherman! I am sure you could not
catch the gold-eyes.”

These are stupid little fish, which will suffer themselves to be pulled
out of the water with the hand.

“I will catch one, and put it down your back,” I threatened, but
Akshelah went on laughing.

“The gold-eyes will have all sunk to the bottom because the sun is
going,” said she. “You will have to go home empty-handed. We laugh at
the young men when they come home empty-handed.”

“You are laughing at me now!”

“I laugh at everyone.” She tried to hush her merry voice. “In the
morning sometimes I laugh into the face of the sun himself.”

Our homestead was encircled by rolling park-like country, which
stretched away endlessly upon three sides; but on the fourth, the
western, there was merely a strip of bush separating us from the Yellow
Sands River, which made a winding course round Big Stone Point, and
entered Lake Whispering some twenty-six miles lower down. Our log-house
stood upon a clearing, with a little cow-byre adjoining which sheltered
our few beasts in winter; both buildings were thatched with swamp
grass. We had reclaimed from the bush about five acres of garden,
where father grew what grain and vegetables we needed, and the flowers
grew themselves. The willow scrub and the wood-ants were our principal
difficulties; and Antoine, our Indian servant, whose duty it was to
keep the ground clear, devoted more anathemas than labour upon his
work. To this day I do not know who owns that land, whether the Crown
or the Hudson Bay Company, but the matter is of no importance.

One night when I reached home father was smoking, sitting upon a log
beside the door, silent as usual. Father had always been taciturn; had
I not been provided with Indian companions, I might have altogether
lost the use of my tongue. He eyed me more narrowly than usual, I
thought, but he said nothing as I passed. We had our supper, and I was
about to roam outside to watch the insects of the night at play, when
my father surprised me by calling in a hoarse voice:

“Sit down, Rupert!”

I had always stood in awe of the unhappy-looking man who called himself
my father. All my life I had lived with him at Yellow Sands, knowing
no other relation, no other friend, except my Indians and morose
MacCaskill, factor of the dying Hudson Bay Station. Why my father
spent himself there I did not know, and the thought never troubled
me, because I did not then know that there was any world outside
that narrow circle of the horizon where earth and sky met. I had no
learning; I could neither read nor write. I had often been to the lake
shores, and I knew that boats sometimes came to the yellow beach; but
where these boats came from I had no idea.

“Rupert,” began my father, “have I taught you anything? Do you know
what London is?”

He spoke in the deliberate manner of a man little accustomed to speech,
and he had his hand to his brow as though his brain were tired. I
replied, not wishing to be ignorant:

“Is it anything like a moose?”

“It is not an animal,” said my father. I wonder now that he did not
smile. “London is the name of a city, and you were born there.”

He stopped, and I could hear the throbbing murmurs of the night. There
was no lamp in our shanty, but we could see by the northern lights,
and by the fire which smouldered outside the open door to keep away
the mosquitos. My father struck a match, rekindled his pipe, and, with
the match still burning between his fingers, walked across to the far
corner of the room, and opened a box; presently he came near, and I saw
that he held a buckskin bag. He poured out the contents upon the table,
but when I bent forward to look, as the light flickered up momentarily,
I was disappointed. Only a few ounces of coarse dirt, and some small
honey-combed stones.

“Is that stuff of any use, father?” I said. He looked across slowly,
and I went on: “I picked some yellow stones like those out of the white
rocks up Split Leaf Creek. I gave them to Factor MacCaskill.”

Turning upon me abruptly, my father went on:

“I have been for the best part of my life a gold-hunter. I, too, was
born in London, and I was once what they call a gentleman. You may
understand the meaning of the word some day. I have made more than
one fortune in my time, but fortunes so made melt as quickly. During
an exceptional period of prosperity I returned to my native city,
there married, and you were born.” He started suddenly. “Come with me,
Rupert.”

He had re-collected the gold, and now snatched at the bag and left the
shanty. I followed, along the dark-blue trail, where I had lingered
with Akshelah that afternoon, and out over the river falling in bars
of alternate black and silver to its own soft music. Father held the
buckskin bag swinging by one hand. It was large and heavy, but he
launched it forth with one strong movement, and it went under the water
with a sullen splash.

“When I am gone, you shall never say that I did not teach you one
lesson, boy.” He went back, and I followed, wondering what this
teaching meant. When we had passed the smoke of the smudge, and had
regained our home, father seized my hand. “Gold has ruined me, Rupert.”

Then he went away, and I suppose to sleep, but I wandered outside,
trying hard to think; and when the lights grew brighter, and the sounds
of the bush more distinct, my untrained mind awoke, and I had dreams
that night.

Father had always looked ill. One day I thought his face was whiter
than usual. I ventured to ask after his health, and succeeded in again
drawing him into conversation.

“I have only a little more time to be miserable,” he said, in his slow
fashion. Then his manner became harsh. “Shall you stay here when I’m
away, or will you go to find the world?”

I stared at him, and said the only thing I could: “Where is the world?”

“You will learn.” He looked up at me, his face twitching, and said more
quickly, “I have seen you with that native girl. If you want to be
wise, marry her when I am dead, and live your life away here. She is a
natural woman. If you must be a fool, like your father, go back to the
world. You will find the false thing there.”

I had picked up my muzzle-loader, thinking he had done, and was going
out to the bush, but he stopped me, and his voice became nervous.

“If you ever meet with a man, a tall man, with loose white face--he
would be elderly now,”--father hesitated, then laughed wretchedly, and
almost shouted at me--“his name is Redpath. He has kept me here in
hiding all these years.”

I did not shoot any partridges that morning. By chance I met Akshelah,
and after we had been together a little while, I found that the morning
had somehow slipped away. She showed me how to sew with grass upon
buckskin, and all the time laughed at my clumsiness. The grass would
keep breaking; she declared that I strained too heavily upon it. Her
little brown fingers were so light that they might have sewn with
gossamers, but when I told her so she only pricked me saucily with her
needle.

Nearly every day Akshelah and I were together fishing or hunting. How
stern her face would become, and how resolute, as she struggled with
a wolf-like jack-fish, knee-deep in the yellow sands, and being drawn
deeper every minute! She came with me to shoot tree partridges, and
so sure was her eye, and so agile her every movement, that she would
catch the great stupid birds as they tumbled headlong out of the black
poplars. I was often at the tepee, and one midnight when the moon was
large I danced at the lodge with Akshelah that exhilarating dance of
friendship, which makes a man beside himself for the time with mad
strength and passion. The tribe became as my own by the rights of the
dance, and I was the son of the chief and the brother of each brave.

And yet nearer to me the cloud of sorrow gathered and darkened. In
spite of the skilled attention of our native Antoine, father weakened
fast, more quickly, perhaps, because he would not take to his bed, but
insisted upon working as he was able.

Factor MacCaskill came over one day, and when he left I met him along
the trail. He was a big, morose man, but his heart was sound.

“Rupe,” he said, “old man’s call is on the way. We’ll miss him
hereabouts.”

That same evening I was cutting rye-grass along the snake fence,
Akshelah near me hindering, when Antoine came running out of the
shadows to startle me with the message that my father had fallen down
unconscious. I ran back with him, and Akshelah sped to her own people
to summon them to the passing of the white man.

Father was stretched along his bed, his eyes shut, his face grey-white,
and I heard his hard breathing before I had entered the house.

The lamp was lighted. I sat by my father’s side, fanning the flies from
his weird face.

“No good, boy,” muttered Antoine. “The Spirit call him, an’ he not say,
‘I cannot.’ He go.”

I had no religion, beyond the native belief in the two great spirits,
Good and Evil, therefore I was relieved when there came against the
window the deep red glow of the death fires, and I heard the solemn
chant of my Indian friends beating upward. Round the house went the
Cree doctors in their official mummery, marching in a solemn circle,
making their incantations to keep the devils at bay, their voices
rising to a dreadful yell, then sinking abruptly into a mere shivering
whisper.

MacCaskill entered, and seated himself largely upon the chest in the
corner. He smoked all the time, but never spoke.

“Maidens!” called a deep voice, and straightway the clear sweet voices
of the maids ascended, singing the prayer of commendation to the
Spirit. I heard only one voice, the clearest and best, the voice of
Akshelah, and as I listened I forgot the presence, and began to dream
again.

A heavy hand came upon my shoulder.

“Stir yourself, Rupe; old man’s away.”

Antoine moved about slowly, setting the house in order. The death fires
were burning out, and the Indians departed in solemn file. Although
I had never been what is known as friendly with my father, I felt
unmistakably alone.

“Maybe ye don’t want to stop wi’ that,” went on the factor. “Come along
over to the Fort, Rupe Petrie.”

I started at hearing that name. “Petrie?” I muttered.

“Ay, that’s your name. Old man went sudden, or maybe he’d have told ye.”

Rousing myself, I went out with the factor, and we walked over to the
Fort through the silver night.

We buried my father the next day under a big pine a stone’s throw from
the door, and Antoine heaped a mound to mark the spot. Akshelah stood
with me beside the grave, her black hair wrapped in a red shawl as
bright as her cheeks. We were alone.

“You will be lonely?” said she softly, her head to one side.

“I have you, and the factor, with your father and the tribe.”

“Oh, yes,” said the girl, and I saw that she was happy because I had
named her first.

The evening found me turning out my father’s chest. There were letters
and papers, which he would probably have destroyed, had not death
tripped him up so suddenly. As I could not read, these were of slight
interest, if I except one ragged sheet, half covered with writing, and
the other half containing a rough diagram, where I thought I made out
sea and coast, with rocks and hills behind. Always anxious to learn,
I smoked over this torn sheet for a long time, and even after I had
lighted the lamp I turned to it again. The letters I had put into a
box and hidden.

It was a silent night. Antoine slept in the kitchen, and an electric
storm might have passed leaving his slumbers unbroken. The door was
open, and the smoke of the smudge hung between me and the night. I was
about to go towards my bedroom, when my highly trained ears caught a
sound, which was not made by any bird, or beast, or insect in the bush.
I looked up, not afraid, but startled. I stepped forward, and put the
lamp above my head. Through the flickering smoke I made out the figure
of a man.

I took him to be an Indian, and called out in Cree. No answer came, but
the man stood out from the smoke, and I then spoke to him in English,
because I was sure he had mistaken my home for the Fort.

“An elderly gentleman of the name of Petrie lives here, I believe?”
asked the stranger.

He was tall, loosely made, and his clothes hung on him badly.
Unaccustomed to strange white people, I became confused.

“My father is outside now,” I said, not for the moment realising that
my words contained a meaning I never intended.

“Ah, yes. And where, may I ask?” The stranger’s voice was smooth, and
his manner deferential.

“Under the big pine.”

I indicated the shadowy outline of the tree, and immediately, to my
great surprise, found myself alone. I had forgotten the sheet of paper,
still spread out upon the table, and before I had collected my wits the
man was back. He smiled at me with his large mouth, and looked over me
with his cold eyes, making me more uncomfortable than I had ever felt
before.

“I imagine it must be very easy to fool me,” he observed gently. “I
have been deceived by so many people, your good father among them,
and you have fooled me with your first word.” He smiled, still more
guilelessly. “When did he die?”

“Yesterday,” I answered, but while I said the word his eyes started
like those of a starving man.

I was too quick for him. I was nearer the table, and I snatched away
the sheet of paper, as his long hands pounced at it.

“I really believe that is my property,” he said eagerly, yet backing
indifferently. “My good fellow, I am positively convinced that is mine.”

“No,” I said simply.

The man felt in his pocket, and I suddenly picked up my unloaded gun.

“What are you about?” cried the stranger, with assumed horror. “Ah, you
are Petrie’s son, I can see, hot, headstrong, and impulsive, mistaking
a friend for an enemy, just as he always did. You must know that I’ve
been searching for your good father close upon twenty years, and
wasting my life doing it. He stole that plan from me. It is terrible
to have to say so, but you require me to make good my claim. You know
what it is, of course?”

I was quick-witted enough not to play into his hands.

“I know all about it,” I lied firmly.

The man changed completely. He made a quick move, leaned forward, his
hands upon the table, his eyes freezing at me.

“Partners?” he suggested.

I could hardly guess his meaning, but I went on playing my own game.

“All right,” I answered.

He put out his long arm.

“We will make our arrangements in due time. For the present I must beg
to retain my own property.”

I hesitated, and in a moment my father’s warning came. I looked at the
flabby face, clean-shaven, with loose skin hanging in pouches.

“Tell me your name!” I called, but while my attention was distracted
the long hungry fingers snatched the paper out of my hand.

“Redpath,” said the man, as he left me.




THE ADVENTURERS


For the first time in my healthy life I knew what it was to want sleep.
After my father’s enemy had left me, taking that paper upon which he
set so much store, I lay awake for hours. Despite my ignorance, I
felt that the old idle life was done, that the new and stranger had
already commenced, and the way ahead looked dark. At sunrise I went to
the river and bathed, and after early breakfast set out for the Fort.
MacCaskill was splitting logs in front of the store, and did not cease
from his occupation while I was telling him of the coming of Redpath.

When I had done he sat down and refilled his pipe; after some
storm-like puffs he asked me what I had made out of it, and when I
helplessly shook my head, he spoke.

“What I know of your father ain’t scarce worth talkin’ about. He
stopped here fifteen years, but kept himself buttoned up all the time.
I knew his name. I knew he’d been a miner. I knew he was an Englishman.
The rest is loose in me fancy. Like to hear?”

I was eager to hear anything, whether fact or fancy, and he went on:

“Ole Petrie never settled here, I guess, because he wanted solitude,
nor yet because he liked it, but just because he was scared to live in
the world. Lots like that, Rupe. He’d done something--or was suspected,
and maybe wanted, and fancied he couldn’t clear himself. This Redpath
knows all about it. Likely he’d run your father into doing it.”

“He was hiding from Redpath,” I said.

The factor nodded.

“There’s that bit o’ paper,” he muttered. “Why in Jerusalem didn’t I
have a sight of that! Then his firing that bag o’ dirt into the river!
Don’t you see, Rupe? No, course you don’t. He told me one time he
wanted you kep’ ignorant, or I’d have opened up your eyes long enough
ago. Old man struck a rich pay-streak one time, and all he knew is
set right down on that paper. Golden gates! Why wasn’t I with ye last
night? This Redpath has been hunting years for that secret.”

“What is the use of the gold?” I said.

The factor swore.

“Sit down,” he said hoarsely. “I’ll tell ye what you ought to have
known soon as you was able to balance upright.”

Then he began to tell me something of the world--not the little outside
world I had always lived in, but the great inside world which knew
nothing of Yellow Sands, my home. He defined for me the two terms,
poverty and wealth, and he told me incredible stories of lifelong
struggle for that gold, which I had despised as gaudy trinkets for an
Indian maid. He went on to describe to me the meaning of many things
this gold will procure.

The abstract of this new learning showed me that I was a savage,
a heathen, a man of no account, because I was outside. Much that
MacCaskill told me remained then beyond my mental grasp, but I was
naturally shrewd, and certain stupendous facts became uncovered, and
stared at me nakedly. The dose of understanding was so powerful that my
head ached with it, and my throat went dry.

The factor stopped and wiped his mouth. I found the voice to mutter:

“What can I do?”

The big man looked me up and down.

“Follow Redpath,” he said strongly.

The mere suggestion made me cold. My eyes rested upon the trees,
the river and rocks, the Indian tepees, barely visible--all the
surroundings that I had loved, and which had given me content, because
I had thought the world had nothing better to offer.

“Leave Yellow Sands!” I exclaimed.

“Follow fortune,” muttered the factor. “Look at Redpath,” he went on
warmly. “Fifty years old, I reckon, and maybe a villain in the first
class. He’s after fortune yet. You’re twenty-one, though I allow you
look five years older. You’ve got your chance. I know what you don’t,
that you’re a grand specimen of a man. You can thank ole Petrie for
that. Ye must stay by Redpath, and keep a strong arm over him, ’cause
he’ll get ahead of you if he can; and if the gold pans out, and there’s
a claim to spare, maybe you’ll mind ole Mac, who’s put you up to a
thing or two to-day. Then you can go to London, where you were born,
finish your education, and, if you’ve got the stuff, do any durned
thing you want.”

“How did the man come?” I asked absently.

“Hudson Bay boat makin’ to Pine Island, I guess. They dropped him at
the mouth of our river, and he worked up. He can’t get away till that
boat comes back, which won’t be for three weeks. Where is he, anyhow?”

I did not know myself. Redpath had disappeared as he came.

“He’s got a camp in the bush. Look-a-here, Rupe. He don’t want to see
ye again. He’s got what he came for--”

“He promised to be my partner,” I interrupted.

MacCaskill frowned.

“I guess I’ll be telling you now what sort of an insect a humbug is.”

I listened, as the sun rose up in the sky, until there came to me a
desire for liberty, and a longing to see those things of which the
factor spoke. If I were a strong man, if I were qualified to take a
place among others, why, surely I was wasted in Yellow Sands, and lost
in the bush, among the animals and the Indians. It would be better
to go, even though the parting might make me unhappy for a time.
MacCaskill went on:

“Antoine will go on livin’ on the homestead. I’ll be over once in a
while, and if you do want to come back and waste like old man, why, you
can. But you won’t.”

Then I went away to hunt for Redpath. I was as skilled in tracking as
any Indian, so I quickly picked up the tracks at the entrance to the
bush, and had commenced to follow them, when Akshelah walked sadly from
among the trees. She had been tracking me.

“You are going away,” she said at once, and there was no trace of a
smile upon her face.

“Who told you?” I answered, feeling uncomfortable about her sorrow.

“When a white man goes away, he does not come back. Never! never! He
goes to his own people, and they hold him, and he does not want to come
back.”

“Akshelah,” I said, “my father is dead, and I must avenge him.”

At once the girl’s face changed, even as water will change when the sun
falls across it. Vengeance was a religious duty in her creed, and she
would regard the man who should allow a dead father to sleep unavenged
as something lower than a coward. She smiled again, though the smile
was still sad.

“When you have done your duty, you will come back?” she said very
softly, and I gave her the promise which her heart desired. “Those are
bad men who came to you in the night,” said she. “He who is tall, with
the great face, is a man of lies. The little man, who has a white face
like the belly of a fish, will be moved like sand when it is dry.”

I looked from her expressive face down upon the well-beaten bush path.
Now that she had spoken, I discovered the tracks of two men, and I also
learnt that friends, as well as foes, had watched for me during the
night.

“Listen,” said the girl. “One of the young men saw your enemies coming
over the sand where the river touches the great water, and he came to
tell me. So I told the young man to follow, and he saw the tall man
come to your tepee, but the little man watched where the bush begins.
The tall man came back, and the two went away together.”

I had moved on while Akshelah was speaking, but the girl’s eyes were
keener than mine that day. She picked up a half-burnt match, and
called, “This way the men went.” I joined her, and we passed on through
the bush, seldom stopping, for Akshelah was never in doubt, and scarce
an hour had gone before she whispered to me, “Smoke.” Presently I,
too, caught the acrid odour above the sweetness of the pines. We went
on cautiously, until we heard the cracking of sticks in the fire, and
soon we were beside the camp, and saw a tent set among the pines, and a
small man crouching beside the fire. We walked out, and I called:

“Where is Redpath?”

The little man started round, and his uneasy eyes passed from me to the
girl, and then on blankly to the bush.

“I am Rupe Petrie, his partner,” I went on. “Has he gone to the Fort?”

“Gone shootin’,” said the little man shortly. “Might a-gone to the
Fort. Ain’t my racket.”

“Why are you camping in the bush?” I said. “You can come to my shanty.”

“You may be eaten by flies here,” added Akshelah, somewhat as though
she hoped the thing might come to pass.

The little man made a shuffling reply, and Akshelah availed herself of
his discomfort.

“You are his servant,” she said, with much scorn. “I would not be that
man’s servant if I were a man.”

The listener flushed faintly, and poked at his fire, but he would not
give any answer, so I made to go.

“I have lots of food at the homestead,” I said. “If Redpath wants any
he can come for it. I will share with him as I said I would.” And with
these words we came away.

That evening I went to clean out the cow-byre, and while thus occupied
I saw the tall figure of Redpath come clear of the bush, and after a
certain hesitation, proceed towards my home. I was about to go out and
meet him, when the lessons I had received from MacCaskill that day
advised me to alter my mind. Obviously the man had come to discuss his
plans, and it would only require a few questions for him to discover
that I was in complete ignorance of what was written on the paper he
had taken from my hand the previous night. I slipped at once round
the building, and passed down to the river, and on to the native
encampment. On my return Antoine informed me that Redpath had asked
for some fresh meat, and had taken away with him the greater part of a
quarter of moose.

At the dead of night another visitor came to me. I was aroused from
sleep by a voice whispering hoarsely about the house, and when I had
struck a light a small figure came towards me from the door, and I saw
the white shifting face of Olaffson, the Icelander, for that was the
name of the little man we had found by the camp fire in the bush. He
made a warning motion, and then sat down beside me.

“Say, have you spoke wi’ Redpath?” he muttered. I was still so
surprised at the strangeness of this visit that I did not answer him at
once, and he went on: “He’s no pard of mine, see. I’m with him for what
I make. If I came over to you I should make more, eh?”

“This is a trick of Redpath’s,” I said angrily, forcing myself up.
“He’s waiting outside now?”

“He’s sleepin’ like a dead man,” said the Icelander. “See now. He got
that paper from you, and he knows what’s on it. You know. I don’t. He
carries it on him by day, an’ hides it nights. What d’yer say, eh?”

He little thought that I was as ignorant as himself.

“So you want to give your friend away?” I said.

“Redpath ain’t no friend of mine,” said the little scoundrel. “You
ain’t either; but I surmise you’d pay me better’n he has. I’m square
when I get good pay.”

His white face gleamed unpleasantly by my bedside.

“You want me to show you the place where the gold is?” I suggested,
making a double hazard.

“That’s right. We’d go together an’ fight off Redpath, see! You’re
strong. We’d work the place, share and share, or each for hisself.
Redpath don’t mean you or me neither to have any.”

“There’s enough for all of us,” I said, again at a venture.

“That don’t do for Redpath. He never could share. Gimme a ear, pard. No
listeners.”

The little wretch put his horrid face close to mine, and whispered the
shocking proposal that, as a consideration for my letting him into the
secret, he should murder Redpath in his sleep.

I rose in horror, but when I threatened to throw him out of the house,
the Icelander grinned at me.

“Killin’ a man in the bush ain’t much of a job,” he muttered.

“Get out!” I said. “Get out!”

Olaffson backed slowly.

“If I ain’t wi’ you, I’m wi’ Redpath,” he threatened.

“If you were with me, you would sell me to someone else.”

“Not if you paid me well.”

“Take yourself out of the place!” I cried angrily; and the little
scoundrel went.

By this I made myself the enemy of Olaffson, the Icelander.

Midway between my homestead and the native encampment lay an open
space, where grass and flowers grew strongly, and butterflies played
throughout the day. This had always been a favourite spot of mine. On
the river side an untenanted ant-mound had become covered by natural
green, and this afforded a very comfortable resting-place for one,
and a possible one for two, as Akshelah and I had proved. It was our
favourite meeting-place, and in order that it might not become invaded
by the bush, I had lately given a day to lopping back the encroaching
branches and tendrils, and cutting off the shoots of young trees which
here and there had tried to take possession in the grass.

Upon the following afternoon, or it might have been the early evening,
for I seem to remember that the sun was coming low, I was running to
this open space--running, because I had promised to meet Akshelah, and
I was well after the appointed time. I had been delayed at the Fort.
Truth to tell, MacCaskill was teaching me my letters, and my eagerness
to learn was so great that I had temporarily forgotten my beautiful
country maid. I was nearing our patch of natural garden, when I heard
the sudden sound of a human struggle.

The trained ear does not mistake such sounds, nor can it confuse
them with the stir made by animals fighting or at play. For one
moment I stopped, that I might be sure of my bearings, but while thus
motionless, a cry rang startlingly forth, not of fear, but in defiance,
and it was the cry of Akshelah; but it was cut short, as though a hand
had closed upon her throat.

I had never known what it was to lose control over my strength, but
I had learnt much since my father’s death, so that it became merely
fitting for the animal side of my nature to receive its lesson. The
trees seemed to rise and float away from me; a hot hand inside my body
jumped up to my throat; a mist closed before my eyes, and the sunlight
appeared to glint with a red glow. I felt my feet flying under me, and
the bushes giving or breaking as they went by.

I sprang panting over the ant-mound, and two figures resolved
themselves out of the mist--Akshelah fighting upon her knees, a thin
line of blood joining her nostril and lip, and over her the tall,
leaning figure of Redpath, his great hands holding her throat, his eyes
hideous, and his flabby face white and slimy. I was mad. I was a wild
beast, with no control, and with no human knowledge.

I crossed the interval of grass at one bound--another; and while I
descended, I struck out with my left arm, and my wiry fingers met
the dull, loose flesh of the adventurer with the hard shock of a
great bullet smashing into a tree. I threw myself after the blow, and
when that terrible heat of rage and brute strength had cooled, I was
sprawling across the body of Redpath, and he was stretched as he fell,
making a strange shape along the grass.

Akshelah wiped the blood from her face, and as I rose, she came upon
me; and when I clasped her pretty body in my arms, she kissed me
passionately. And while she kissed me, I wondered how it was that men
set so much store upon gold.

I lifted Redpath’s head. He was breathing heavily; his skin was cold,
and to touch it was like handling a fish.

“Run to the encampment, little squirrel,” I said, calling Akshelah
affectionately after her totem. “Send a boy to bring the Icelander
here.”

The girl came up to me, deliberately wreathed her warm arms about my
neck, lightly caressed my forehead with hers, and went quickly to do my
bidding, without a word.

Then I removed from Redpath’s breast-pocket a case, which contained the
well-preserved piece of paper that had belonged to my father. Sitting
upon the ant-mound, my body still quivering from its late passion, I
awaited the coming of the Icelander.

So I made myself the enemy of Redpath, the Englishman.




A LAND OF HIDDEN TREASURE


The voices of the bush sang a changed song during my night walk. The
moon came out over the ridges and lit up the flagstaff, and faintly
illumined the thread of smoke ascending from the single stove-pipe
chimney of the Fort.

I walked across the furrowed fire-break, where a few pink briars
lingered, and opened the door of the low, whitewashed building, with
the lack of ceremony to which I had always been accustomed.

MacCaskill sat at his table, making entries in a big ledger. He looked
up morosely, nodded, and his big head went again over his writing.

“Three gallons fish-oil,” he muttered, speaking each word as he set it
down, “at one blanket, value four, seventy-five. Profits ain’t what
they was when furs were plentiful. Well, what’s the latest racket?”

I came over to his side and opened the sheet of paper upon the table,
smoothing the ragged edges with my flat hand.

The factor’s face changed, and he stopped drawing in his smoke, but
looked up from the table and scanned me narrowly.

“Which goes to say,” he said in a deep voice, “that you and Redpath
have been havin’ a match, and you’ve come in Number One.”

“Not a word has passed between us,” I said.

“Give me deeds every time,” muttered MacCaskill.

He brought his head nearer the table, and I waited for his next word.
“Bonanza” was that word; and then a silence came between us, until the
factor left his seat, and stood upright against the stove.

“What does it mean?” I exclaimed.

MacCaskill drew a sulphur match along the top of the stove, and let it
splutter and burn until the flame touched his fingers. Then he dropped
it unused.

“You’re twenty-one, and I’m sixty-five. You’re fresh, and I’m spoilt.
You’ve got everything before you, and all mine’s ’way behind. There’s
that difference between us.” Then he burst out: “I don’t know that a
man can get too old for this one thing. I’ve had a bad, lonely, useless
life.” He struck another match violently, flung it away, as though he
tried to throw off his weight of years. “Darn me if I don’t begin all
over again!” He came to me, his great face agitated. “Redpath asked you
to be his pard, did he? You’ve broke with him to-night; and if you want
another pard, he’s right here before you. Is it a go?”

He gave me his strong hand, and I knew that I had won a friend.

Then he spoke to me regarding Bonanza, the place of gold, my father’s
secret, while I told him of my meeting with Redpath, and of the
punishment I had given him.

“For a woman!” the factor said grimly. “Wait till you know the world,
and you’ll find that the woman comes in everywhere. Watch out when
you’re walkin’ lone in the bush, and fasten your door nights. Redpath
won’t forget that knock-down; and mind, you’re standin’ in his way all
the time.”

I asked him what he thought of Olaffson, and he answered with scorn:

“Just a crooked tool. He’d stick a knife into his brother if there was
anything comin’ to him for the job.”

The factor reached for his straw bonnet, and announced his intention of
going down to the encampment.

“I must get one of the boys to start first thing in the morning, to
take a message along to Fort Determination. I want someone to take my
place here right away,” he explained. “Redpath’ll have to wait for the
_Lac Seul_. We’ll go by canoe, and get ahead of him at the start.”

We had not left the sparkling river, after visiting the native
encampment, when MacCaskill asked abruptly:

“Anything else in that chest of your ole father’s, Rupe? Always been
thinkin’ of it when you weren’t handy?”

What a fool I had been! I had completely forgotten that packet of
letters, after I had taken and hidden them in a box under the floor.
My companion proposed that he should come at once and examine them,
so we turned off into the bush, where the dew showed like points of
light, and on to my homestead, which was dark and silent, for Antoine
was already asleep. Entering, I closed the door, and after lighting the
lamp I dug out the box, and handed its contents over to MacCaskill.

One by one he glanced them through, and pronounced them for the most
part unimportant.

“No use worryin’ out old man’s back life,” he said. “Most o’ these are
from his gal, your mother, addressed to him at Seymour Place, Hyde
Park, London, England. A copy of his marriage certificate. Another
of your baptism. Better keep that. You don’t know what it means, but
you will one time, maybe, if you strike a missionary. Now, here’s
something a bit different: ‘Your sincere friend, Francis Redpath’;
headed, ‘Forsyth Mansions, Victoria Street.’ P’r’aps that is London
again. Golden Jerusalem! He’s promising to be your father’s best man;
postscript, ‘Anything from J. F.?’”

MacCaskill’s busy fingers pulled out another letter, and, as he read,
he fell into indistinctness. At last his hands dropped.

“Shall I tell you, lad, or shall I just say it’s bad and burn it, and
leave you to guess?”

“Tell me,” I said, as anyone else would have done.

The factor picked up the letter, and read:

  “‘It is common knowledge that you killed Joe Fagge that night, and
  there will be as little mercy for you as you showed to that poor
  old devil, when you are taken. You have deceived and ruined me, and
  though you are at present out of my reach, you must know, my good
  Petrie, that I shall find you, if I hunt long enough. I have set my
  mind upon having the old man’s secret, and I shall have it. If you
  try to withhold it from me, I am afraid I shall have to kill you.
  Remember me. I don’t give up a search, if I fail twenty times.’”

The factor folded up the sheet.

“That’s enough,” he said. “No address. I guess it was brought to ole
Petrie by someone who wouldn’t give his hiding-place away. Now we know
why he wasted his life away here. I thought maybe ’twas something like
it, and Redpath’s got here, as he said he would, though he didn’t get
in until old man had his notice to quit.”

His words came booming at my ears.

“Father was never a murderer,” I said.

“I knew old man, and now I know Redpath. If I was asked to pick out the
murderer, I wouldn’t stop to choose. Now here’s something else. Golden
gates! Listen, Rupe. Listen to this.”

He read out slowly:

  “‘The true statement of James Petrie.’ That’s your father, lad.
  That’s old man. And this is gospel, for he never wanted it to be
  read while he was alive. Listen to this, I tell ye.”

I was listening with both my ears, while the night quivered and
murmured around my home. MacCaskill began to read:

  “‘It was late in the fall of 1874 when Joe Fagge made his accidental
  discovery of Bonanza. He was accompanied only by the half-breed
  Leblanc, who was in camp when the old man made the great find of
  the hole, and who was kept in ignorance, I imagine, of the whole
  thing. As it was too late to do anything until the next season, Fagge
  returned south, and settled to winter in Portage la Prairie, where
  he came against Redpath, who at the time was speculating in land,
  and, as usual, doing no good. Both he and I knew Fagge well enough,
  and we had often received from him useful hints regarding promising
  localities for gold-finding.

  “‘The old man was the cleverest, and most eccentric, miner in the
  whole north-west; but in that winter of 1874 his brain began to fail,
  and when given a little liquor he could be brought to talk about his
  one great discovery. Redpath knew his weakness, and kept close to
  the old man to hinder him from giving away the secret to others; but
  Joe had a violent dislike for Redpath, and refused to give him any
  details as to the bearings of Bonanza.

  “‘I had just returned to the west, as my young wife had died shortly
  after Rupert’s birth. I had spent all my money again, and came
  out to find another good digging along the gold line. Redpath sent
  for me from Portage la Prairie, but when I got up, Joe Fagge was
  little better than a madman. I kept with him, and chained him up,
  metaphorically speaking; but it was tough work looking after him and
  my little Rupert, babies both, for the old man was always crying for
  liquor. Redpath and I had quarrelled pretty badly just before--not
  for the first time. His cynicism was intolerable. I had not been
  what one would call a particularly straight man myself, and I knew
  he wasn’t much better than a scoundrel; but on the “honour among
  thieves” principle we hung together, and I trusted him part of the
  way.’”

MacCaskill turned over the leaf, and read on, his face hidden. My eyes
looked over him, and rested upon the window.

  “‘Joe improved a lot as the winter went out, and finally he consented
  to take me to Bonanza, although he would not hear of Redpath
  accompanying us. The break-up came early that year, and we were
  able to start in April. We hired a boat, but it pinched to find the
  money--miners are poor in the spring--and set out from Selkirk,
  getting safely out of the river, and away, though we found a lot
  of loose ice floating about the lake. Our crew consisted of Joe,
  Leblanc, a couple of nitchies, and myself. A boat which followed ours
  held Redpath and his man Olaffson. I had arranged with him to wait
  off the coast, until the old man had told me all he knew. I marked
  the course carefully as we came along, and set it down in writing;
  but it was plain sailing until we came under the coast, where Joe had
  forgotten a good deal, and we had to try a lot of places before he
  could recognise the shape of the beach. Leblanc, a half-breed of the
  worst class, was of no use. On the previous occasion they had come
  overland to the shore, and then worked back. The key of the discovery
  lay in the finding of a tunnel out of a canyon, which we called the
  Canyon of the North Wind, taking us through cliffs of a perfectly
  inaccessible nature. This pass the old man had named Mosquito Hole,
  and this is the name I have given it upon my map....’”

MacCaskill pushed himself back. My attention had been led astray, and
the closing sentences of my father’s narrative had been lost upon me.

“The other half of the sheet’s torn away,” said the factor morosely.
“Just as we were comin’ to the excitement. Old man must have thought
better of it. Maybe he tore it by accident. There’s no more yarn,
anyhow.”

“Don’t move,” I said softly. “There’s trouble. I have seen a face
against the window.”

MacCaskill suddenly pulled a quick breath, then, throwing his body
forward, burst into a hearty shout of laughter.

“Seen anything?” he muttered, after a pause.

“A shadow passed. The moon’s bright.”

“And Redpath’s worryin’ over the knock-down you gave him.”

The factor gave another loud laugh, then, getting up, pulled the
blanket, which did duty for a blind, across the window. When we were
concealed he turned and snatched up my late father’s old gun, while I
caught at and loaded mine.

“We can step out by the window at the back,” I said.

“Leave the lamp burnin’. That’ll fool ’em.”

Passing into the kitchen, we shook up Antoine, who slept in his
clothes. I carefully pushed aside the mosquito netting, and climbed
through the window, which lay in darkness, for the shadow of the house
fell that way, and a bluff of small pines grew right back to the wall.
My companions followed, and we glided among the trees, climbed the
snake fence, and entered the scrub, with the idea of working round, to
watch from the bush what might be taking place in front of the house.
I led the way, because I knew every inch of the ground, and MacCaskill
followed, breathing like an ox, and Antoine came sleepily third. I had
just reckoned that another twenty paces would bring us clear of the
scrub, when I smelt smoke, and through the trees came a quick flash
without noise, and the unmistakable odour of gunpowder. The factor gave
a hard snort of rage, and Antoine muttered heavily, “Burn! Burn!”

“That’s powder out of their cartridges,” said MacCaskill. “Bet you
they’re watchin’ that door, and think we’re trapped.”

Some rocks were scattered outside the bush, and behind one of these we
took up our stand; a volume of smoke rolled over the ground, and when
it had passed I saw a series of flames darting up and out suddenly. My
home, the little log shanty that my father had made for a refuge, was
burning, and it was useless to think of trying to save it. The loss of
the shanty was in itself a small matter, because another equally good
could be run up in a day, with the aid of my Indian friends; my few
possessions were of very trivial value; but associations cling about a
building, be it only a bush hut, when it has always been one’s home.
I felt, for the second time that day, the hot, unreasoning strength
coming over me from head to foot, and I rested my gun upon the shoulder
of the rock when I saw a tall figure standing beside the door, leaning
forward, and waiting, hoping for revenge.

“Don’t do it, Rupe,” said the deep voice behind me. “That sort of thing
leaves a bad taste all a man’s life. Meet a rascal to his face, and
knock hell into him, but don’t skunk behind a rock and pump lead his
way, like he was a jack-rabbit.”

“Are we going to stand here?” I said, in a voice unlike my own.

“We’ll watch ’em away. You can’t save the shanty, boy, and if we go out
you’ll make at Redpath. I’ll have to take on Olaffson for sympathy,
and there’ll be a lot of trouble. You’ve got well out of this, and you
don’t want to spoil the game now.”

The logs of my late home were cracking and splitting under the fire.
Antoine was more philosophic than I, and accepted the inevitable with
his customary indifference. The flames wrapped round the shanty, and
the dry thatch roared, putting out the light of the moon. Then the roof
smashed down, with an upburst of fireworks, and the two dark figures,
the tall and the short, came together, and sneaked away, with backward
glances.

My arms twitched again, and I must have made a threatening movement,
because a great hairy hand seized the barrel of my gun. The figures
became swallowed up, and we three were alone again.

“Say, Rupe”--MacCaskill moved back a pace, and put out his two thick
arms--“I’m sixty-five, and I guess Redpath’s the wrong side o’ fifty.
How should we go? If we stood together, wi’ our sleeves up, and wi’
tight waists, how would we go, eh?”

“It would be bad for Redpath,” I growled, and Antoine grunted his
assent.

We three went back to the Fort. In the morning came Akshelah to tell me
that a canoe belonging to the chief had been stolen during the night.
Aided by a fresh north wind, which sprang up with the dawn, Redpath and
Olaffson had made good their escape. At the time my maid spoke, the
incendiaries would have been well away upon Lake Whispering.




II

THE LUMBER CAMP OF GULL ISLAND




LIFE!


The men of all nations occupied the station of Gull, a summer camp upon
an island bearing the same name, but the majority were Norwegians and
half-breeds, with a sprinkling of natives, the latter a degraded and
treacherous set, resembling my own Indians about as nearly as a red
lily resembles a choke-weed.

Some hotels stood upon the island, making their profits by the saloon,
where some four hundred men weekly liquidated their pay. The “shelters”
were all upon the island, which a shingle beach half a mile wide
connected with the mainland, and along this beach curved a railway,
which conveyed the prepared lumber down to the wharf of Gull Harbour,
where it was shipped into scows. The saw-mills were stationed along
the main beach, and here the chimneys sent out their smoke, and the
buzz-saws whirled seven days to the week, because the season was short.

The _Lac Seul_ of the Hudson Bay Company had carried MacCaskill and
myself as far as Waterhen, and we had made the portage of fifty-seven
miles from that point to the shores of Lake Peace on foot. I was
frightened at the sight of so many faces, and bewildered by the noise
and devilry of the camp; but my companion fortunately knew where to go,
and I followed him closely, as though I had been his dog.

We put up at the Tecumseh House, and the factor took me about to
accustom me to the novelty of my environment. In winter this settlement
would be heaped up with snow and icebergs, and the only inhabitants
would be a few Norwegians, left to look after the machinery, with
sufficient supplies to last them until the following May. There were no
women in the lumber camp, only men, and a bad crowd of them, according
to the factor.

I could not sleep in the Tecumseh House because of the all-night
noise of the card-players, and the shouts and threats of drunkards,
and at last I gave up the attempt. It was quite dark, although near
morning, when I rose and dressed, and was about to leave the room when
MacCaskill came to comprehend what I was doing. I explained that I
could not sleep, and had made up my mind to go out and walk into the
forest, that I might feel myself at home again.

“Watch yourself,” he grunted sleepily. “It’s a bad crowd hereabouts.
If any feller speaks to ye awkward, ask him what he wants after you’ve
knocked him down.”

The hotel door stood wide open night or day, the entrance only guarded
by a wire mosquito frame. All about the hall were men, either lying in
chairs or sprawling upon the floor, in various stages of sleep, and all
fully dressed.

It was an unusually cold morning considering the season. A heavy vapour
hung upon the east to proclaim the nearness of the dawn. The air was
wringing with moisture; but when I reached the track my ears became
gladdened by the pleasant booming of the water along the shore. Before
me a few shadowy trees dripped and shivered. I shivered myself at the
miserable prospect, and, for very loneliness, stopped to light my pipe,
longing all the time for my little home above Yellow Sands.

It was only natural that I should desire to reach the solitude which
life and custom had made me love, and I felt relieved when the last
shelter had been left behind, and I felt myself alone on the neck of
shingle between wind and water. Suddenly my foot went from under me,
and I discovered that I had slipped upon an iron rail. I had forgotten
the railway track which carried the lumber from the main beach, until I
saw a red eye peering through the mist, and in the interval the metals
gleaming in the cold half-light, with beyond some low black cars, all
dripping with moisture, like silent monsters that had crawled there
from the lake to sleep.

I walked on, and had reached the side of these open cars, when I
became startled by a shadow which rose overhead, and I made out a
brown-bearded face, crowned by a ragged, wet straw bonnet, the chin
resting upon two filthy hands clutching the top of the car.

“Mornin’, stranger!” called this apparition.

The man was well out of my reach. So far as I could judge, from the
lack of light and the little I saw of him, he was dressed in the
discoloured canvas which I had already learnt was the costume of the
sailors upon the inland sea of Lake Peace. I replied very shortly to
his salutation, and was for passing on, when the tenant of the car
shifted, and said:

“Gimme a match!”

An unmistakable rustling reached my ears, and I said as boldly as I
could:

“That’s straw you’re lying on.”

“Jest a bunch, an’ leetle enough for sich a night,” grumbled the man,
beating his cold hands together. “I’m ’most fruze. If I was to make a
move, sudden-like, I’d have some of me bones snap. You’re around early,
stranger, or late, maybe. Ben playin’ poker?”

I made a step away.

“Gimme a match, jest to start me bit o’ plug. It’s lonesome fixed here
without a pard. Here’s half a pipe-load, an’ it’ll smoke good. Don’t ye
be scared of a blaze this wet mornin’.”

Somehow I did not intend to yield to his pleading, and went on my way,
whereupon the sailor changed his tactics, and shouted:

“You’re the mean pard of the white-face Icelander skunk what went by
jest now. He swore at me when I spoke him perlite, ‘Gimme a match,
pard,’ and I swore at him back. You’re a pair of loose cat-fish!”

I did not know at the time that the phrase, “a loose cat-fish,”
signified upon Lake Peace a man’s supreme contempt for an adversary;
I only observed the phrase, “a white-face Icelander,” and that was
enough to stop me. We had heard nothing of Redpath or his accomplice,
although MacCaskill was confident that they must have proceeded to Gull
Island, which was the nearest point in communication with our common
destination.

“Which way did he go?” I said, turning back.

The sailor rubbed the moisture from his heavy eyebrows.

“We’re startin’ to shout!” he said, with a husky laugh. “Gimme a match.”

I took a few sulphur matches from my pocket, and passed them into the
grimy hand.

“Me mem’ry’s sorter wakin’,” went on the sailor cheerfully, “but a
dollar bill would live it along surprisin’.”

I saw that I was being made a fool of, so I said sharply:

“Are you going to tell me which way the Icelander went?”

“Not unless you show silver,” said the sailor, pulling a match along
his leg. “We can’t work for nothin’ in hard times.”

“I haven’t got a cent on me,” I said, and it was the truth. I might
also have added, with equal truth, that I had never owned a cent of
cash in my life.

“He’s only jest got by,” the man said temptingly. “When I heard ye,
I thought ’twas him a-comin’ back to apologise, an’ a-beggin’ me
acceptance of a paper o’ matches.”

I had played enough poker at home with my father and MacCaskill to have
acquired the first principles of bluff. Had I not already succeeded
with Redpath?

“I guess he went this way,” I said, moving off in the direction of the
mainland.

“You’ll get left,” said the sailor, puffing contentedly. “See here,
stranger! Yer pard’s gone along inter the town. That’s truth, for
givin’ me the matches.”

I swung round, and went on the way I had intended, leaving the sailor
cursing in the car.

Light began to prevail over the shadows as I approached the mainland
beach, where great piles of prepared lumber for the markets of the
world awaited shipment. Above and around, thousands of those white
birds which had named the neighbourhood filled the air with the noise
of their wings and their screams. It was difficult to make rapid
progress, because the shingle was littered with logs, and the light was
shifting and uncertain. The saw-mills took shape before me, and the
half-wrecked forest gaped behind. Then a short figure began to dodge
about a sheltered angle made by the wall of the nearest machine-shed,
and I felt sure I had recognised my man. Coming up as quickly as I
could, I thought for the moment that the rascal was trying to set fire
to the shed, but when I was almost up, I encountered the stiff breeze
from the lake, and understood that he was getting a light for his pipe.
He was bending his back towards me; a tiny red flame shot up, and a
cloud of smoke followed. The next instant I was behind him, cutting off
the only way of retreat, and, while his head was still down, I called
“Olaffson!”

The pipe was dashed against the corner of the shed, and fell to the
shingle. An exclamation of dismay followed, not from his lips, but from
mine. Before me was not the white face of Olaffson, but the dark, heavy
countenance of a half-breed whom I had never seen before. I hurriedly
concluded that this stranger knew Olaffson, had possibly just parted
from him, the Icelander returning to the settlement, as the sailor had
said, and this man coming on to the mills.

“I made sure you were Olaffson,” I said coolly, as the half-breed bent
to reclaim his pipe. “Has he gone back to the camp?”

The man looked at me stupidly.

“What d’yer want wi’ Olaffson?” he muttered at last.

“I just want to know how far you are in with him and Redpath.”

The half-breed shifted, and avoided my gaze.

“Redpath ain’t here,” he growled.

I began to be delighted with myself, and went on with increased
confidence:

“I know where he is.” This shot had no effect, but I remembered the
Icelander’s character, and suggested meaningly: “You’re in with
Olaffson against Redpath.”

The half-breed again moved awkwardly, and growled:

“That ain’t so.”

“I know Olaffson,” I said.

Possibly these simple words contained a meaning beyond my
understanding. The man glanced towards me wildly, then dropped his
eyes, and kicked sullenly at the wooden scantling, his face wearing
that grey pallor which betokens fear in a half-black.

“And I guess you know me,” I went on. “My name is Petrie.”

That beat him. He turned shivering, and edged away, his face ghastly.

“Lemme go,” he whined. “I never done it. You can’t bring it up agin me.
I tell ye I didn’t have a hand in it. Lemme go, _sir_.”

Mentally blindfolded, I fumbled for the truth.

“Don’t you tell me you haven’t seen Olaffson this morning,” I said.

“He’s on the island,” admitted the breed. “I saw him las’ night.”

“And Redpath, too.”

But the man gave a strong denial. He declared he had not set eyes upon
the English adventurer for years, and I was constrained to believe him,
because I could see that he was terribly afraid of Redpath.

“What’s your name?” I said sharply.

Success had made me too bold. The question displayed the weakness of
my hand, and dull as the man might be, he was quick enough to see the
blunder. He stared at me in his owlish fashion, and muttered hopefully:

“You ain’t Petrie.”

“I guess so,” I said, feeling myself weaken.

“Let me out er this,” said the half-breed roughly.

He pushed by me with contempt, and I was too crestfallen to oppose
him. In any case I could not have used force, because the day had
broken, and men were already coming along the neck connecting Gull
with the mainland. The breed slouched away towards the saw-mills, and
I walked back to Tecumseh House, where I found MacCaskill starting his
breakfast. When I had reported, he said:

“A half-breed, eh? I’ll go one better, and put a name to him. Don’t
ye mind old man’s statement? That feller’s name will be Leblanc, the
‘half-breed of the worst class.’”

Directly the factor spoke I remembered, but the chance had passed.

All day we kept to ourselves, considering our plans; but after dark
the factor impressed upon me the necessity of mixing with the crowd,
as otherwise the inhabitants of Gull might conceive the idea that we
imagined ourselves superior to them, and that is the way which leads to
unpopularity.

To me this summer camp, with its stores and saloons, was a great,
bustling centre of life, and I thought myself quite one of the world’s
citizens; but when I asked my partner if Gull at all resembled the
town of London, where I had first seen the light, he doubled up with
laughter.

“Why, Rupe, this is only a bit of a lumber camp. You should see London,
Ontario, me boy, where things do keep on the buzz. And they say that
London, Ontario, ain’t in the same gang of flies wi’ London, England.”

Suddenly the lamp-lighted night-dens began to disgorge their occupants;
and when everyone set their faces towards Gull Harbour, the factor
stopped a flaxen-haired Swede, and asked him the reason of the
excitement. He returned to me with the information that the steamship
_Carillon_ was just drawing into harbour, while the residents were
turning out to put themselves into communication, so far as they might,
with the outer world.

“She’s the boat we’re going by,” said my partner.

We joined the rough-voiced crowd of all nations, and came to the round,
slippery logs that made the landing-stage.

To me the scene resembled a vivid dream rather than any picture of
human activity. The big ship moved in slowly, her lights flickering,
and presently the ropes, like lithe brown snakes, sped uncoiling
through the air. Everything was silvered with wet, because clouds of
spray swept continually over the wharf, and the wind freshened even
while we waited. Hanging to the rough poles, above the waves that were
breaking and creaming over the stones, a few greasy lanterns swayed;
and in the conflict of lights hundreds of gulls circled, screamed
wildly, and dropped upon the water like huge snowflakes, or wheeled
away into the outer darkness. Behind the settlement tiers of black rock
went up, backed by ascending terraces of sweeping trees of soft wood,
right away to the dark-blue sky-line; and between, where the waves
were flung upon the crags, I saw innumerable points of light lit by
the fireflies, darting, going out, and starting again into light. The
gangways ran out, and the canvas-clad sailors were quickly at work,
rolling provision barrels over the greasy logs to an accompaniment of
shouts and dialect chatter. A few bundles of newspapers were dispersed,
and here and there an eager group had formed to discuss the news of the
world by aid of one of the lanterns.

Presently a voice shouted close beside us:

“Watch yerselves, boys, here’s the mission-airy!”

“What’s that?” MacCaskill called, pushing forward, while I followed,
unwilling to be left.

“Father Lacombe, of Three Points,” said one of the sailors, flinging a
barrel up on end, and spitting on his hands before clutching another.

While he spoke I caught sight of the large, black figure of the first
priest I had ever seen, stepping carefully over the logs. He was
wearing a hard felt hat, and his cassock was fastened up behind by
means of a safety-pin; I caught the glint of this tiny article as the
priest walked away towards the settlement of Gull.

“Three Points Mission. That’s across Peace,” said MacCaskill, turning
to me. “P’r’aps he’ll cross wi’ us.”

Father Lacombe walked away leisurely, his valise tucked under his arm,
his cape flapping in the strong breeze, and when darkness had closed
after him the crowd began to jeer.




SOME HUMAN NATURE


On the following morning (Sunday), MacCaskill took me into the Star
saloon, the foregathering place-in-chief of the lumbermen, in order to
introduce me to some human character. The bar was filled with men who
had religious scruples against working on Sunday, all in peaceful mood,
reading the newspapers that had come with the _Carillon_, or commenting
upon the doings of many a country and many a personage whose names I
now heard for the first time. It was not etiquette to gamble before
noon. A regular gale was blowing at the time, and heavy rain lashed the
tin roofing.

Overhead, a lighted lamp swayed, its yellow glass fogged in smoke,
which wreathed everything; the odour of this smoke, combined with
that of the liquors, and the chewing of black tobacco, was sufficient
to almost intoxicate a saloon tyro; but, fortunately, my manner of
life had been so healthy that I experienced no inconvenience beyond
a certain unpleasantness in getting my breath. The factor paid our
footing, and we were established and introduced as good citizens of the
town of Gull by the simple process of drinking with the crowd.

Presently my companion nudged me.

“Do ye mind yon feller?” he said, nodding towards the end of the bar,
where two men, one tall and elderly, the other fat and middle-aged,
stood smoking very black cigars. “The feller wi’ black and white hair?
That’s Bob Lennie, captain of the _Carillon_. Come across.”

We joined the two men, and the factor introduced me.

“What’ll ye have?” said the captain at once.

A bottle was pushed across the sloppy bar, and we helped ourselves,
although I did little more than flavour the water with the hot corn
whisky, which I thought the most nauseous compound I had ever tasted.
By this time I began to understand why men would run mad at the
suggestion of gold; but that they should care to wreck their bodies for
the sake of such horrible stuff as that biting liquor, as the factor
assured me they did, was to me incredible.

“This is my mate,” Lennie was saying. “Sandy, boy, here’s Andy
MacCaskill and Rupe Petrie from Yellow Sands. You’re comin’ across, eh?
Well, we’re going north quite a piece, an’ comin’ back wi’ a cargo of
fish. We’ll be gettin’ away for the Little Peace in maybe five days’
time, if this dirty weather don’t hold.”

I had seen few men, but I could not have imagined any stranger-looking
than Bob Lennie. His cadaverous face was cross-hatched with innumerable
lines, his eyes were dark and wild, his hair partly coal-black, and
partly silver-grey. He stooped a good deal, but he was well over sixty.
He was the father of north-west navigators, and nearly every part of
the treacherous inland sea of Lake Peace, its hidden reefs and shoals
and silt-bars, were to him an open book.

“Not many passengers these days, I guess?” hinted MacCaskill, when we
had found a corner to ourselves.

Sandy, the mate, smuggled beside me, and launched himself into a
discussion of something which he called the silver question in the
United States; but I could do nothing except listen, throwing in a
monosyllable of sheer ignorance occasionally. He was quite content to
monopolise the conversation, while I listened to the captain and my
partner. The former was saying, in answer to the latter’s question:

“A few new hands comin’ out to the fisheries, and a preacher once in
a while. Say, we picked up Father Lacombe yesterday morning, and he’s
paid on to the Little Peace.”

“Where did ye strike him, anyhow?” asked MacCaskill.

“We was passin’ White River, an’ he signalled. Said he’d packed down
to the coast after a mission-airy journey upland, wi’ a couple of
nitchies, who took themselves off in the night wi’ all his supplies.
I said to him, ‘Don’t ye want to find them thieves, father?’ ‘Course
not,’ he said. ‘It’s a punishment to me for havin’ taught ’em badly.’
Lord, Mac! don’t these preachers talk soft!”

The two men laughed together.

“He’s quite a priest down east, they tell me,” went on Lennie.

“Saw him come ashore,” said MacCaskill. “He don’t look strong on
fasting Fridays.”

“They do say the less some men do eat the fatter they do get. It’s one
of those things they call a parridox. But what’s the father wantin’
around Gull at all?”

“No, siree!” shouted the little mate at my ear. “What’s the silver
standard? Explain to me the value of free silver. In what way, sir, is
the silver dollar better than the paper? Tell me that.”

It was impossible for me to enlighten him, and I said so.

“I guess you’re right,” the captain said. “The father’s come to look
around, wi’ the idea of startin’ a mission. There ain’t enough of his
religion hereabouts to make it a going concern.”

“Lots of half-breeds,” suggested the factor.

“Well, but they ain’t got religion. Maybe the father’ll be preaching
some place to-night. I ain’t religious meself, but I like an opera, and
I wonderful well like to hear a sermon, if there’s lots o’ blood and
fire about it.”

“Say, Mister Petrie, are ye a Republican or a Democrat?” demanded the
rasping voice I had almost come to ignore.

I turned to the mate, and assured him that I was neither.

“You’re a neutral, eh? Well, I don’t hold wi’ neutrality, which jest
means scrappin’ wi’ everyone. I like to scrap for me own party.”

“Do I mind Joey Fagge? Why, course I do. There ain’t any old-timer who
can’t tell you something ’bout him. He was the cutest ole Sam-Peter
west, and they tell how he could smell out gold, same as these miracle
chaps down south fetch water outer the ground, or shoot it outer the
sky, or some such durned trick. No one knows where he finished, though
I’ve heard tell how he got caught in a storm on this very lake and was
drownded.”

“Did he die rich?”

“Ever heard of a miner who did?” said the captain, laughing hoarsely.
“Last time I saw Joey he was flyin’ off the handle in Main Street,
Fort Garry. Seems some American chap had bested him upon a real-estate
bargain, an’ the old man took that sort of thing bad. He was a
good-natured ole chap too. I know that, ’cause I was in Garry time of
the boom, and I know a yarn if you want to listen.”

The mate was besieging my ear, but my attention was not for him. I
edged towards Bob Lennie, that I might hear all I could concerning the
man my father had been accused of murdering.

“A young Englishman came inter Garry ’bout the middle of the fun,” went
on the captain. “Ye see, he fancied he was goin’ to look out for a job,
but when he saw the cash an’ champagne-water a-flowin’ around, an’
found lots o’ folks happy to stand him drinks and leave him the change
if he wanted it, he started to quit his thoughts of work, an’ surmised
he’d struck an almightily soft way of living. Time came, of course,
when he found himself gettin’ left dry on the rocks, an’ as he hadn’t
near enough at the week-end to fix up his hotel bill, he nat’rally
walked into the bar at mornin’ wi’ the idea of runnin’ outer what he
_had_ got. After takin’ a doctor’s prescription, he moved ’way up the
street, spoilin’ for excitement, an’ presently he pulled up at Central
Hall, where a big real-estate sale was going on. The boy’s brain must
have ben a bit in wool, ’cause he started biddin’ for a parcel of land,
and sudden-like the lot was knocked down to him. D’rectly he found the
other fellers had quit, you can believe me he made back to the hotel,
to find out a cool place to set down in; but call me what you like,
Mac, if a chap didn’t come round, jest as fast as his legs would bring
him, to offer to take the property off the boy’s hands at the price
it had ben knocked down. And he hadn’t time to call this chap his
brother before up came another, wi’ two or three more ’most tumblin’
after him, an’ every one cappin’ the offer of the man before him. A
boom had struck that bit of property sudden, an’ it had ben knocked
down before the bis’ness fellers could get around to Central Hall.
Course the young chap was ready to scream, but he had the sense to
pretend hatin’ to part wi’ the property, an’ he hung on until he got a
wonderful big price, they say. Nobody worried over a few extra hundreds
those days. Well, I saw him later on, an’ old man Fagge was drinking
champagne-water wi’ him, an’ talkin’ to him like a father, an’ advisin’
him to stuff his valise, an’ make east outer the racket, before he
flung away that pile he’d jest made by the biggest and almightiest hunk
of luck outside creation.”

“Did he go?” I broke in.

“I guess so,” said Bob Lennie. “Anyhow, I never saw him around no more.
Now, I call that real good of ole Joey to advise that young fool to get
home, when he’d the brain to get all that pile inter his own pocket.
Put that down on the credit side when anyone starts slingin’ things
’gainst old man’s character, I say.”

At the Tecumseh House, where Father Lacombe was also staying, we learnt
at dinner that the priest was unwell.

“Got what he calls a chill,” announced the proprietor, adding, “He can
keep it while he stops here. He won’t spend nothing for the good of the
house.”

After the mid-day meal we went up to the room which we shared between
us, closed the door, and sat on our respective shake-downs, there being
no chairs, to discuss business. We had brought over from the Yellow
Sands store the greater part of our supplies and tools, but there were
still necessary articles to be added to our packs, and these were all
obtainable at Gull. MacCaskill was paying my expenses as well as
his own, and now that I began to understand the meaning of the thin
slips of paper which he smoothed and fingered so deliberately, I felt
uncomfortable at being dependent upon his savings, the more so when he
said, “We’ll want to be careful, Rupe. The bank ain’t any too muscular.”

I suggested that we should camp out upon the mainland for the remainder
of our time; but my partner demurred, because he thought it advisable
to watch and wait in Gull.

“You’ve got brains, boy,” the factor went on.

“Where do you say Redpath is?”

I thought awhile before replying shortly, “Here.”

“That’s what I’m sayin’ all the time. Olaffson and he are hidin’ some
place, and I guess they’re spyin’ upon us. How are they going to cross
Lake Peace? They won’t have the gall to face us on the _Carillon_.”

I suggested that, as they had stolen a canoe from Yellow Sands, they
might make away with one of the steam-tugs used at Gull to take out the
lumber scows.

“Takin’ a tug outer Gull ain’t the same trick as stealin’ a canoe from
a nitchi camp. There’s too many folks around, and they might be hanged
for stealin’ hereabouts.”

“I should know that canoe again,” I said, and well I might, for I had
paddled Akshelah in it many a time. “It’s not around here.”

“Pshaw! They’d have broke it up, and used it on the camp fire.
Professional rascals don’t take risks. Look-a-here! We’ve got the
nickels to stand this racket, but after we’ve bought our cornmeal, an’
bacon, an’ dried fruit, an’ a few little tools, an’ paid our passage
across, we won’t have a lot to gamble with. The best we can do is to
move along easy, watchin’ and not worryin’, and if Redpath’s on the
ground when we strike it, there’ll be a fight if he’s awkward. If we
can fix up things so as to work our claims apart, without scrappin’,
that’s our line. If Redpath won’t have that, it’s throw up hands, and
the best partners scoop the pool.”

Then the factor produced a pack of cards, and we played poker, and
after that went to sleep upon our shake-downs.

It was almost dark when we awoke, and took to smoking to pass the
time. Rain was still beating, but the wind had lessened, and a wet
mist hung over the lake. It was cold, and I felt miserable; MacCaskill
looked depressed, and we were both silent. Thus an hour of unutterable
dreariness dragged away.

MacCaskill coughed suddenly, opened the box-stove, spat into it, and
flung away the stub of his cigar.

“Swallowed a bit of leaf,” he growled. “Sets a man ’gainst smokin’ for
a while.” He laughed grimly, and rubbed his hands. “Cheer up, Rupe;
it’s Sunday, lad.”

“What about it?” I asked, for I had never been brought to look upon one
day as different from another, apart from good or foul weather.

“Why, on Sunday evenings I gen’rally get as dolesome as a gibcat.
Mem’ries, I guess, but you ain’t got enough past to make any of them.
When I was away in the bush I kep’ track of the days easy. Whenever a
fit of the megrims came on ’bout lights down, I’d know ’twas Sunday. It
gen’rally worked out right. I come out clean and fresh Monday morning,
but Sunday night I get hipped reg’lar. Say! What’ll you do, if old
man’s notion pans out?”

“Follow your lead,” I said.

I expected the old fellow to laugh, but the dolesome fit was on him,
and he became more surly than ever.

“I went home ’bout eight winters ago,” he said morosely.

I saw that he was in the mood to talk, so I settled myself to listen.

“I went home,” he repeated. “Away east to St. Catherine’s. That’s in
Ontario, and ’twas a daisy of a place when I was your number. I went
home. D’rectly ye shift outer any place ye get forgotten. See? Rainin’
yet, I guess?”

“Yes, it’s still raining,” I said.

“Well, it’ll do no harm, maybe. You see, when you come back to an old
home ye expect to find a place kep’ for ye. Understand?” He gave me no
time to reply. “Well now, I left St. Catherine’s when I was a younker,
and got a post north in the Company. ’Twas a far better thing then than
’tis to-day, and I reckoned I’d stop a few years, make a leetle pile,
come home when I was thirty, and marry Maimie Flett, who was waitin’
for me. Pretty little gal, Maimie. Had a way of lookin’ at me sideways.
She was goin’ to wait for me. Wind’s comin’ up again, I guess?”

“Maybe,” I said, though I had not noticed any change.

“You see, those years got slippin’ away as though they’d ben oiled
for it. I worked steady, an’ I saved a bit, but that pile seemed to
be awful slow in mountin’ up. Life was in front of me, anyhow, and I
said, ‘No matter, there’s a fine time a-comin’.’ I wasn’t going east,
not till I was able to marry Maimie. The years got tumblin’ along one
over the other so quick, Rupe, and Maimie she writ slower, and then she
quit. Must have ben tiresome for the gal, and she hadn’t leisure like
me, maybe.” The factor stopped, bent, and rubbed his leg.

“You went home?” I suggested.

He repeated the words after me slowly.

“Came upon me one day sudden,” he went on. “Me muscles had always ben
good and worked easy, and I was comfortable in the wind, and right on
me food and sleep. One evening, I mind it was wet and cold, I made to
pick up a log to carry in to bucksaw. I just gave it a good heave on
to me shoulder, and hot snakes jumped right through me, and run all
along me back, and I let that log drop. I couldn’t have carried that
log, Rupe, not if it had ben a bar of gold. You see, I was comin’ on
fifty, an’ that pain was rheumatics. Old man had ’em bad, and you
mind how Antoine used to rub him wi’ some of his medicine truck. That
night I got smokin’, same as usual, in the Fort, and I stopped over
it longer, ’cause I’d taken a new pipe from the store, and a new pipe
smokes longer than the old ’un, and I got seein’ the smoke a-twistin’
around, and presently I seemed to see Maimie, and she was lookin’ at me
sideways, and she was sayin’, ‘Why! ’tis never you, Andy! They’ll be
callin’ you “old man” when you come down to St. Catherine’s.’ You see,
Rupe, I’d got an old chap sudden, an’ I found it out sudden-like.”

I had nothing to say to this, because I was young and strong.

“You miss life by waitin’ for it, Rupe. You’ve got to take, an’ never
wait. I took me leave anyhow, and went east to see the old place again.
I was a sort of fool, ’cause I reckoned to find things same as I minded
’em, and Maimie a little bit of a gal, wi’ a way of lookin’ at me
sideways. I came in on the Grand Trunk, and I got out at the depôt, and
stood lonesome, and peeked around, jest as awkward as a fly in a glass
of beer. You see, I’d known everyone in St. Catherine’s my time. I said
to a feller, ‘What’s the name of this place, anyhow?’ and he said,
‘St. Catherine’s, stranger,’ and that took the wind outer me. ’Twas an
almighty big town, an’ I’d left a village; an’ the valley was choked
wi’ buildings, like summer fallow wi’ Russian thistle, an’ there wasn’t
any folks to mind Andy MacCaskill. There wasn’t a face to gimme a
smile, Rupe. Not an ole pard to call out, ‘Seems like ole times havin’
you around again.’ That’s what my goin’ home was.”

“And what about the girl?” I said.

“Never heard tell of her,” answered the factor morosely.

His mood changed in a moment, and we sprang together from our
shake-downs. Above the beating of the rain and the wind, above the
shouts of the drinkers below, came the noise of a nearer scuffle,
with the brutal laugh of coarse men, the tread of heavy boots, and a
feminine voice, half pleading, half in anger. There were no women in
Gull!

The passage was gloomy, because evening was closing, and there was
only one window to give light, but I had no need to look twice to see
a girl, her head and fine hair half-wrapped in a dripping shawl, and
this girl struggling in the hands of a half-drunk crowd of lumbermen,
shouting their rough jests and brutal suggestions. A beautiful girl in
the camp of Gull!

I knew her before I could see her face, and when I did see her
rain-marked features, they were more beautiful than ever. She was my
faithful maid, my Akshelah!

She put out an arm, the other was held, and called to me:

“I have followed; I have followed, and it has been hard!”

The factor’s story of his life was hot upon my ears, and I heard him
saying, “You’ve got to take, and never wait.”

I acted upon this precept. I scattered that rough gang, and sent the
men reeling back each way. I rescued Akshelah, swung her lithe figure
into our room, where MacCaskill stood bewildered, and stood in the
doorway, my arms out, holding at defiance the lumber station of Gull.




AN AFFAIR WITH JAKE PETERSSEN


It had often been my lot to fight the animals and the elements, but now
for the first time I faced my fellow-creatures, every one my superior
in experience of the world, and every one apparently my inferior in
muscle. As I glanced them over I knew that I was strong enough to
break most of them up like so many corn-stalks. I could have shouted
as depression left me, and glorious life throbbed along every muscle
of each limb. There was not a weak spot in my body. My eye was so true
that a man might have indicated a spot twenty feet distant and I could
have jumped cleanly upon that mark. I was exhilarated as I stood in the
doorway, with the whole camp against me. I was soon to learn how fickle
a crowd can be.

Behind me stood Akshelah, so that her breath caressed my neck. I put
out my hand and pushed her back. The factor stood against the side
wall, peering into the passage, fetching breath suddenly.

“I guess you’ll quit, an’ give over the gal, stranger,” a big-bodied
man confronted and advised me.

“She’s mine,” I said, and I was glad to find my voice steady and clear.

“She’s come around here,” went on the representative of public
opinion. “An’ now she’s a-comin’ down to the saloon to dance to us.”

“I’ll see you all darned,” I said quietly.

A babel of tongues hummed round my head. A mighty shadow appeared to
fall, and for one moment I cooled and weakened. A huge negro pushed
aside the big-bodied man, and stood within hand-grip of me. He was
a hideous creature, his face scarred, his front teeth gone, one ear
frozen off, and when he moved I saw that his mighty body was supple and
packed with muscle. He wore a loose cotton shirt and white pants, which
exaggerated his great size. This apparition glowed upon me with small
malevolent eyes, and said:

“’Pears like, stranger, you forgot hittin’ dis chile. Hit him on de
nose an’ eye. You take what you give, eh?”

I understood that I was being challenged, and replied: “I guess.”

“You gimme de gal, an’ stop de trubble?” suggested the fearful creature.

I merely replied: “She’s mine.”

“That’s so, boys,” bellowed the revived factor. “The gal’s his, and she
followed down here to find him. Where I come from, a feller’s got a
right to his own gal.”

“He knocked us around,” said a voice.

“Hit me on de nose an’ eye,” repeated the negro. “No man hit dis chile,
an’ not git it back. I’m ready fo’ you.” He slapped his arm. “No
knives, no shootin’. Jest strip an’ scrap, and de best scrapper take
de gal.”

“I’m ready,” I said.

Old MacCaskill was at my elbow, and Akshelah between us. My partner was
cold with excitement.

“The boys’ll be just, Rupe, if you show devil,” he whispered. “It’s
Jake Peterssen you’ve got to fight, and they say he’s never ben bested.
Keep quiet, and don’t waste yourself. Get at his neck, if you can, and
if you can’t, get at the side of his jaw. Mind that--mind, the side of
the jaw hard.”

The saw-mills were stopping, because the gloom of the night hung around
Gull. The news flew about like thistle seed in a windy fall. The mob
surged and shouted round us, as we passed from Tecumseh House into
the cold rain, and down to a long shed used for meetings and dances,
on the brink of the high rocks that made an eyebrow to the lake. The
wind howled round this exposed spot, and I could hear the beat of the
waves, the lash of clouds of spray, and the sullen song of the shifting
shingle, while the crowd poured in to take up their stand on tables
and barrels, and a score of greasy lanterns were being lighted and
hoisted to the roof. The floor was of well-trodden soil, and while we
were being made ready a procession of men appeared with sacks of lake
sand, which they poured and levelled upon the space reserved for the
fight. I was shivering from head to foot, but it was with excitement
and muscular strength, not fear. Akshelah was as white as the sand,
and MacCaskill looked eighty when he began to strip me.

“This ain’t like knockin’ down Redpath,” he muttered hoarsely. “Keep
his fist outer your neck and jaw, an’ mind your stomach. Love o’
Heaven, mind your stomach! If he touches your wind you’ve got to go
down.”

A couple of coarse-faced men came up, chewing tobacco.

“Out er the way, old man,” said one.

They took me in hand, stripped me to the waist; and one of them took
off his belt and strapped me, saying, as he pulled it in:

“Shout when it starts to pinch.”

When I was stripped I found myself the centre of a great deal of
attention. My skin was fair and hairless, my arms so slight, that I
could have felt ashamed of my appearance; indeed, at first I thought
my examiners were bent upon ridicule, as first one horny hand and then
another patted my chest and pinched my forearm or the back of my leg.
But it was not so.

One man, with a sharp, pinched face, turned from me, expectorated, and
remarked to the negro:

“If he gits a fair holt on yer, Jake, mercy on yer soul! He ain’t got
one ounce of fat under all his skin.”

My opponent’s arms were like trunks of trees, and his neck resembled a
polished iron cylinder. When I looked at him I thought that if I should
get at his neck I should do nothing but tear the skin off my knuckles.

We were oiled from chin to waist with fresh fish-oil, and then the
Master of Ceremonies came out and told me the rules. Anything above
the waist was fair fight, either catching or hitting, except kicking
and biting, and the use of the nails. The catch might be made with the
hand or the arm, but the hit only with the clenched fist. There would
be no intervals, and the fight would continue until one of us should be
disabled for twenty-five seconds.

The hubbub was indescribable; but once it dropped, when a startling
black figure, well wrapped up, pushed in quietly. It was Father
Lacombe; and a great shout uprose when it became published that the
priest had come with no idea of interference, but to see fair play.

The voices went up again, shouting out bets or making jests, until I
took my stand opposite my gigantic opponent, and then they dropped
to deep murmurs and whisperings which, when the word had been given,
became merely deep and long breathings. The familiar beat of the wind
and waves cheered me from outside.

Akshelah stood unmolested beside MacCaskill, and I knew no one would
take any notice of her until the fight was done. There was a certain
morality in the camp of Gull. If I won, the girl would be resigned to
me, and not a man would insult her; if I lost, the camp at Yellow
Sands would mourn for her as one who had passed away from them.

The negro and I stood watching one another, each starting in response
to any movement on the other’s part. His great body shone in the
lamplight, and the oil glistened on his outstretched arms. There was a
knife scar where his neck came to the shoulder above the collar-bone,
and I determined to hit that if I had the chance. It makes a man wince
to feel an old wound struck. I was magnificently cool; my excitement
had passed, and my brain was as clear as my own little river of Yellow
Sands.

With a surprisingly rapid motion the negro dashed upon me, and I bent,
when he made feint with his right arm, and met the crashing blow of his
left fist with my forearm.

A cold, numbing sensation raced through me, but I swung my arm sharply,
and the pain was gone in an instant; and springing up, I caught the
great body and cannoned against it, swinging him round.

He fell on his knee; but this was a trick, for when I pressed on he
came up and opened himself by hitting me full in the shoulder, and I
staggered back, but steadied myself in time.

Again we stood facing each other as at first, only breathing a little
faster.

It was my turn to make the advance, and I did so, making sure of every
foothold in the sand. The negro worked round as I came on, and I
hovered in front of him, until I became fascinated by a grotesque face
which had been tattooed upon his chest. It seemed to me that I had two
adversaries to contend with, the negro and his mascott. After dodging
I slipped round sharply, sprang into the air, hitting away his arm,
and had him gripped by the waist, his right arm fastened to his side.
Silence was broken for the first time as we swung together, I trying
to capture his free arm, and he endeavouring to stun me with it. While
this arm was upraised I hit him upon the scar as well as I could at
close quarters, then dashed my head to one side, striking his flat face
with my cheek, and avoiding at the same time the blow which just grazed
my shoulder. Hanging on, I dashed my knee into his stomach, but in
doing so lost my hold. He got in a blow upon my forehead that knocked
me to the sand. I was up, literally at a rebound, and just in time to
avoid another blow, which, if successful, would have ended the contest.
We stood again as at first, and I heard a far-away voice mutter, “Waste
him, yer young fool!”

I was grateful for the hint. Unless I came to receive a knock-down
blow, I could last for ever. I had no waste flesh to carry. I was hard
and sound, while my adversary was heavy, and comparatively short of
wind. He had drunk plenty of corn whisky in his time, while my system
was entirely free from alcohol. I could see his great neck palpitating
already, and his mouth was open. Obviously I was wasting myself by
trying to throw his massive bulk. I determined to make him move, and
to wait for the opportunity of reaching his windpipe. So I came to
close quarters and kept at my opponent, worrying him like a dog, and
he watched me with his small, half-closed eyes, and hit at me with his
superior science while I skirmished, doubtless with the hope that one
of these mighty blows might reach the fatal spot and lay me out. But I
was too careful of the vital parts, and though the heavy hammering on
my shoulders jarred and weakened me, I retained my presence of mind and
kept my system, and stayed by him, always feigning an attack, but never
wearing myself by striking. His dark hands were stained with my blood,
which I could feel trickling over my face. I had to wipe it away from
my eyes, knowing what nobody else did, that I was as strong as at the
beginning, and the letting of a little blood would do me good after the
forced inaction of the past few days.

“Jake’s winnin’!” shouted a triumphant voice, though I had lost sight
of all spectators. “Drinks to the crowd on Jake.”

“Take yer,” called another. “Listen at the breathin’. The young ’un
ain’t in trouble, an’, be Heaven, he could throw a locomotive.”

I backed, and the negro followed, lurching and lunging at me every
step. Round the ring we went three times, until I did not know whether
the noise in my ears came from the spectators or from the lake outside.
The negro’s eyes were two shining slits, and his hideous face wore
an expression of stolid satisfaction, as he kept coming upon me,
his fists beating and sounding on my bruised arms. He thought he was
winning as he liked; I could not stand before him; he had only to
break down my hard arms, and then he could smash his fist into my jaw
and end the fight. He grinned exultantly when I began to gasp, but I
was fooling him. I could breathe as well that way, and I gasped to
let him think that I was distressed. I was as fresh as ever, and went
back dancing lightly on my toes, every muscle true and elastic. But my
opponent was too seasoned a fighter to grow careless. He kept smiting
at me, without giving me a chance to smite back. He was exhausting
himself, but he imagined, I believe, that I was at least as much spent
as himself.

His opportunity came. I trod on the side of my foot, and was almost
off my balance. The negro came upon me like a cyclone, and the yells
in my ears resembled a February blizzard. There was no avoiding that
black thunderbolt, and it seemed to me on an instant that my head might
be wrenched from its trunk. A sick feeling stabbed me; my brain spun
round like a wheel; every tooth ached violently, and a horrible hand
seemed to clutch at and twist my spine. He had reached my jaw. Another
half-inch, and I should have gone down, unconscious, perhaps a cripple
for life.

The revelry around took voice, and went up with a shout, “The boy’s
bested!”

I recovered in time to ward off the following blow and the negro
gripped me, but I drew in my breath and escaped, his hands gliding off
my well-oiled flesh, and again I ran back, my adversary following to
finish me, and we were both breathing furiously.

Then a clear silver voice rang out and came upon my ears, like the note
of the wavy telling its promise of spring.

“_Naspich milwashiu! Sakehanou!_”

It was the cry of the Dance of Friendship.

Again I heard the drone and whirr of the drums, the soft wind sighing
in the trees. Again I saw the pale moon over the clearing, and the
stars looking down, as we excitedly paced the measure round and round
the fires of the lodge, our hands aloft, our hearts throbbing, our
eyes flashing as they met, exchanging the vow of eternal fellowship. I
snorted like a horse when he smells the coming bush fire. I sprang out,
feeling a giant’s strength idealised in my body, and closing with the
negro, I threw him, while the ground seemed to shake and reel about me.
The madness of that strength given by the dance! As he started up I was
on him, and beating down his ponderous arms smote him upon the neck,
and he fell again with a rattle and a gurgle in his throat. But I could
do no more, for when a man comes to his end he must stop.

We were three paces apart, each of us bent, and the negro spat blood
into the sand. I could not see Akshelah, but I could guess the look
of triumph on her pale, beautiful face, and I could also imagine
MacCaskill biting his moustache, his arms twitching, his eyes wet with
excitement.

“Get on!” the voices yelled madly, and instinctively I felt that the
majority were addressing themselves to me, because I had won their
sympathy. My blood trickling into my mouth revived me. I wiped my hands
in the sand, and came forward towards the black, palpitating mass of
flesh, while the lumbermen shouted, and sweated, and swore, letting
loose their passions in the delirium of watching ours.

The negro gathered himself to meet me, and again his huge arms came
out. The oily sweat rolled off his body, and his legs staggered under
his bulk. I resumed my former tactics of drawing him on, but he saw my
design and baulked me. He refused to act any longer upon the offensive.
Unless I would have him recover himself, I should have to attack.
I came at him, struck, and stepped back; my arms were longer than
his. When he hit back, I jumped round to his side, bent when his arm
swung round, and hit him on the remnant of his frozen ear. He growled
fiercely, the first exclamation he had made, and snatched at me, but
I was away, and came with the persistency of a mosquito to his other
side, and so continued, until he was unsteady, and his dry tongue
sought moisture from his lips.

Suddenly he gave a great groan, and bore down upon me, his arms working
like hammers. Round and round he beat me by sheer weight, like a
dog-wolf wearing down a jack-rabbit, and the blows came so fast that I
could not distinguish one arm from another.

I defended as best I could, knowing this could not last, and once he
had almost done me, because my eyes were blinded with blood. Every
breath seemed to be giving him pain, and I was gasping in sheer
earnest, and my arms were so heavy that I appeared to be holding great
weights in my hands.

We were both men who had never known defeat; but this was my first
serious encounter, while my opponent had won many a hard fight. There
was little advantage either way. I was stronger in wind and steadier,
but I was having my weak moments, and I knew that if my enemy should
get in one of his smashing blows the fight would be over, and he would
have added another to a long list of victories. I could not hit with
the power he was able to command, because I had not the weight to throw
behind a blow. If his arms resembled the trunks of hard-wood trees,
mine might have been compared to wire ropes. He could smash me, but I
could not smash him.

When he staggered towards me again, a new thought took possession of
my brain. If I could not smash I might break. So I went on dodging his
blows, and watched my chance to seize him; but he guessed my plan, and
evaded my hands with all the cleverness of his science.

I was failing. I had it in me to make one more effort, but I knew it
would have to be the last. My opponent could do little beyond holding
me out, and I guessed that he, too, was reserving himself for an
opening to expend his last gasp of strength. He could not be sure of
placing his feet accurately, and more than once I feared he might fall,
holding me, and bearing me to the ground by his sheer weight. I could
have dropped gladly and gone to sleep, but the thought of Akshelah
steadied me. I was fighting for her. Were I to be defeated, I could
never appear in Yellow Sands again.

I closed again with Jake Peterssen, though I was sobbing for breath,
and a hot pain pricked each side of my body. He met me, and for a few
seconds we fought as strongly as though we had come together for the
first time. It was the expiring effort of both of us. We had both
everything to lose. He braced himself with another groan, and smashed
at me straight and strong. I was just able to get back, and then as he
came towards me, following his blow with his weight, he overbalanced,
and I caught him at last. I caught his arm, and bending, swung him
round, though I seemed to be tearing out my heart, and in the midst of
the darkness and pain following that awful effort I heard the sharp
sound like the cracking of a pistol shot, and the building shook about
me again. I had broken his thick right arm!

He was fight to the death. As the darkness lifted I tottered across
the sand, while the universe seemed to be roaring in my ears, and he
dragged himself up and staggered upright, and lurched towards me, his
left arm half-raised, his eyes shut, his jaw dropping. He could do
nothing. He could only stand like an ox before its slayer, and though I
was stabbed and racked by every effort to find breath, I was able, by
virtue of the strength I now began to realise, to come out and hit him
for the last time. Full on his exposed neck came my feeble blow, and he
went down again, a great heap of black flesh, and lay nearly doubled,
motionless, insensible, while the twenty-five seconds were counted out
by yells and oaths.

By a final effort I got the mastery over my legs, and stood upright,
swaying to and fro, and groping, until the arms of MacCaskill closed in
exhilaration about me, and the sweetness of the knowledge of victory
breathed into my body the breath of new life.

Out of the revelry about me it dawned upon my understanding that I had
won the freedom of the Camp of Gull.




THE OLD STONE RUIN OF THE BUSH


The saloon of the Tecumseh House was doing a heavy business that night,
after the noisy supper-hour. I was taken in there, almost by force, to
drink with the crowd, and presently the loose shape of Father Lacombe
loomed large and black, and went by without stopping, but his eyes cast
upon me a glance I could not analyse. One of the lumberers addressed
him, and a laugh went up.

“Says he don’t want to git hit be ye!” called the big man, loosening
his belt. “Might spoil his priestin’ quite a while.”

After the rest and some food I was myself again. Akshelah kept near me
quietly, having done sufficient mischief for one day; but when we three
were alone I tried to scold her for having followed us, only to give
way when she began to cry. MacCaskill was more hard-hearted.

“Allowin’ you’ve had a hard time, you’ve done a silly trick, anyhow.
You’ve done your worst to have young Rupe spoilt and our plans busted.”

“I was lonely,” said the girl defiantly. “And I was unhappy.”

“We all get dolesome,” said the old philosopher, “but we don’t want to
kick against it. The trouble is you got it inter your head to come
along to Gull, where you mighter known the boy would be called on to
fight for ye--”

“I did not know,” began the poor girl, her eyes shining with tears.

“You’ve got your learning now. I guess you’d best set quiet and chew
it. Who came along with you?”

“I came by myself,” said Akshelah proudly. “I left my canoe where
Kinokumisse touches the white sand.”

“You did the portage from Waterhen on foot?”

“Yes,” said Akshelah, as though it were nothing for a young girl to
half-run fifty-seven miles.

“To-morrow you’ve got to get right back again.”

“No,” cried Akshelah, “I will not go, unless you come back to the camp
with me!”

“Him, you mean. You don’t give a darn about me.”

Akshelah was honesty itself.

“Yes, I mean him. I came to find him, because we promised to help one
another; and if he will not have me I shall go home. But I shall not
go to my people. I shall give myself to Muchumeneto at the end of
Kinokumisse.”

I knew that this threat of drowning herself was no idle one, so I
endeavoured to conciliate the wilful maiden.

“You will go back if I tell you.” I intended my voice to be stern. “We
cannot take you with us.”

“I will not. I shall be lonely, and grow old, and you will never come
again. I am coming to mend for you, and I will cook your meat, and
nurse you if you are sick, and sometimes I shall sing to you; and
when you are unhappy I will tell you the story of the little one who
conquered the great beast that the Creator was afraid of, and then you
will be glad again. I will be like the wind, and you cannot stop the
wind from following.”

“Gals are all the same,” said the factor morosely. “I mind Maimie. Tell
her to do a thing she didn’t want, and she’d look up and start to cry,
and I’d weaken and climb down. You bested Jake Peterssen, Rupe, but you
won’t best her.”

“Come here, little squirrel,” was all I said, and Akshelah came like a
sunbeam and sat beside me, while the factor grunted and chopped tobacco.

The owner of the house put his head in suddenly.

“Say! there’s a feller wants to see you, Petrie. Got a message for you,
and he don’t want er stop. He’s standin’ outside.”

I got up and whispered with MacCaskill.

“Don’t leave the crowd, and you’re safe ’gainst all tricks,” he said.

I went down at once, came to the doorway, and, awaiting me there in the
dim light, I found that wicked, white-faced little man, Olaffson, the
Icelander.

Naturally, I began to accuse him, but he stopped me by pushing a note
into my hand.

“I’ve broke with Redpath,” he said. “That’ll show ye where he is. He’s
away from here, an’ left me without a cent.”

I was in a dilemma. I could only read well enough to make out a few
words of print, and this scrawl was something beyond me. I handed it
back, declaring that it was too dark to see, and at the same time
expressing my disbelief in its genuineness.

“All right,” said the Icelander, “I ain’t your friend. I told you that
before. Now Redpath’s quit me. See here!”

It was a plan which he held up in the dim light--a plan of water,
rocks, and hills. He lowered it quickly, with a grin upon his white
face.

“Going to let me join you?” he suggested. “If you don’t move this time,
I’ve got a few pards around Gull, and they’ll jump fast enough, and
pool their savings.”

I kept my wits about me.

“You won’t catch me with bluff,” I said, for the plan was a different
one from that hidden even then in my pocket.

“Mine ain’t a bad copy,” said the Icelander. “I was mindin’ your
clothes, you see, when you was scrappin’ wi’ Jake Peterssen; but I
ain’t a big man, an’ your pard never saw me at work. You won’t make an
offer, eh? I’ve treated you fair. Solong!”

He stepped back from the door, while I tried to think coolly over what
he had told me.

“Come up and see MacCaskill!” I called in conciliatory fashion; but the
little man replied:

“Two to one in a room ain’t healthy. I’ve got what I want. See you
later, maybe.”

He moved back into the rain and the darkness, and I had never a doubt
but that he was taking with him the knowledge of my father’s secret. I
had only to follow and bring him back, and accuse him of burning down
my home. My recently acquired popularity would ensure his conviction;
and the little scoundrel deserved hanging.

I ran out, and when Olaffson saw that he was being pursued he took to
his heels like a coward, and made for the neck of shingle leading to
the mainland. In spite of my recent struggle, I soon began to gain on
him. We had drawn away from the shelters, and there was not a soul in
sight, while the rain lashed continually.

Coming to a great rock, the Icelander stopped short and dodged round
it. I followed, sure of having him; but as I was about to make the
turn, a shock came upon me out of the darkness, and before I could
recover I was caught from behind, a sack went over my head, and I
was borne to the shingle, with the bitter knowledge that I had been
tricked, and that Olaffson had been used as a bait to draw me away from
the settlement.

I had to abandon the struggle, for there were certainly three men
against me. My arms and legs were strapped; a hand sought for and found
the plan, and I heard the splutterings of a match, and knew that the
paper was being burnt. After a terrible interval I heard the tramp
of a heavy beast, followed by the deep snorting of a pack-ox. I was
dragged up, and seated upon this beast, one ankle was joined to the
other underneath its body, and the ox was started, and tramped on, as
it seemed, for hours, until I knew we were well away in the forest,
because the ground was hard, and there was no more rain. The ox was
prodded constantly, but my captors only spoke in deep whispers, which
did not reveal their identity. Olaffson I knew, and Redpath I knew; but
who was the third?

I was cold, racked, and half-dead when the beast stopped. I was taken
down, too helpless to stand, and carried through scrub and long grass.
I was dragged up a wall, and let down upon soft, dry ground. Finally
my legs were released, the sack round my body unfastened, and I was
abandoned, but so utterly exhausted that I fell at once into a dead
sleep, indifferent as to what ill-use might be in store for me.

When I awoke, the first thing that startled me was the utter silence
which told me of my isolation. I worked my head and shoulders clear
of the sack, and got upon my feet with many a twinge of pain and
stiffness. My back was one huge bruise, and my bandaged head throbbed
fearfully.

Between a few lengths of lumber, placed above a small aperture in the
corner, came the sunlight to laugh at me. This hole was quite three
feet above my head. The walls were great blocks of solid masonry, and
I wondered at them, because I had never before seen any building which
had not been built of wood. I did all I knew to free my wrists, drawing
in my breath, dragging, pulling, wearing the straps upon the rough
wall; but my pinioners had made no mistake, and I was not the strong
man I had been yesterday. Anyhow, a man is a poor creature when his
arms are tied behind him.

After a time--how long an interval I do not know, because I think I
must have slept again--the silence became broken, the lumber was pulled
away, and strong light emptied itself into my prison, making me start
and wince, and my eyes run. This new light was again obscured as a
big figure let itself through the hole, and descended by means of a
rope-ladder, which did not quite reach the ground. My eyes cleared, and
I saw under the light the great body and flabby face of the adventurer
Redpath.

With one hand clutching the rope, he nodded at me in an altogether
friendly fashion, and began at once:

“Good morning, Petrie. Pardon me for intruding upon your privacy; but
you may possibly remember that you were not--er--over-courteous to me
upon the occasion of our last meeting.” He put out his hand quickly. “I
do not wish to recall an unpleasant incident. I have always been a man
of forgiving nature, but I will, nevertheless, ask you to place your
own small discourtesy against any apparent indiscretion I may now be
guilty of.”

He spoke in the easy, well-trained voice of the educated gentleman. He
waited, but when I did not speak, he went on:

“I trust you slept well. You must really have been exhausted after that
fight. Allow me to congratulate you upon your well-earned victory. Your
exhibition of science and strength was an education. The little affairs
at a certain London Club which I once attended were quite fifth-rate
performances in comparison.”

My tongue was loosened at that, and surprise conquered everything.

“You were watching?”

“And most profoundly interested,” said the adventurer, with soft
emphasis. “I was so fortunate as to secure an extremely favourable
position from which to view the spectacle. Your blows were perfect
models for any--er--prize-fighter to imitate. Concerning their power
and their accuracy, this unfortunate mark upon my own forehead
furnishes ample testimony. You do not see it? Ah, the light down here
is somewhat bewildering. By the way, you must have been wondering how
these stone buildings ever came to be here. Perhaps you are interested
in archæology? These stone remains take us, I assume, very far back
into the past, and I fancy you and I are the first men of culture to
light upon them. I should say, from a distinctly elementary knowledge
of paleontology, that they were originally erected by fire-worshippers;
but as your local knowledge is possibly extensive, I am quite prepared
to defer to your opinion.”

He pulled out a cigar, standing before me, and went on smoothly:

“You reserve your judgment? Well, I believe you are wise. These ruins
happen to be here, and they serve the sufficiently useful purpose of
affording you with shelter, and there can be no conceivable advantage
to either of us from determining what people or age saw them spring up.
I hope the rain did not come through last night. The roof seems solid
enough. Will you smoke? Ah, excuse me! I had not noticed that your arms
are temporarily unavailable.”

His manner stunned me. I wanted to shout at him, to curse him, and
threaten him, but I was frozen and unmanned by his cynicism, and all I
did say was merely, “What do you want with me?”

He seemed surprised.

“I am, like you, my dear Petrie, most desperately dull, and it
occurred to me that it would be pleasant to drop in for a chat. There
are absolutely no gentlemen in this God-forsaken country. Besides,
your father and I were very intimate friends, before he went wrong.
I remember your birth well; indeed it was only a slight difference
with your father which prevented me from becoming your godparent. You
were a fine child, yes, a distinctly fine child, but I remember you
would never let me nurse you. In fact, you always showed a remarkable
aversion for me.”

His flabby face shook with laughter as he fumbled for a match.

That woke me up, and I said deliberately:

“I guess you’ve got me, Mr. Redpath. You took me foul last night, and
you brought me here for your own ends. What’s going to happen to me
now, only you and Olaffson know; but unless you covered your tracks
well through the forest you’ve done a bad piece of work--”

“My dear fellow,” interrupted the adventurer, “really you must not
suggest such things. It is not my fault if I happen to be entirely
dominated by that vile little brute Olaffson. It is a disgusting
confession for an Englishman to make, but it is none the less a fact.
That Icelander does what he likes with me. He twists me round and round
his little finger. He insisted on bringing you here, and for my life
I dared not cross him. Of course, you find it tedious here,” he went
on, relapsing into his former mood; “and it must be decidedly annoying
having your arms tied--tightly, if I mistake not? Should you be leaving
this place I must, as a friend, warn you against Olaffson. He is a
dangerous man, and what is worse, an utterly unscrupulous man.”

“Are you two going to starve me?” I said.

“My dear Petrie, you are indeed in a morbid mood!” was the answer I
received.

In my sheer impotence I could have thrown myself against the stone
wall. My anger ran away with my prudence at last, and I swore at the
man, and cursed him, daring him to approach me, pinioned though I was.
He looked really disturbed, and when I had done, for lack of strength,
continued softly:

“Too bad, Petrie! That excitement yesterday was too much for you. I
fear you suffer from fighting on the brain. But why speak of fighting
with me? My dear man, if you and I met in a little friendly bout I am
sure I should be unrecognisable to my friends in less than two minutes.
But since you have introduced the subject, what is your opinion of this
compact little protector?” He pulled a little plated revolver from
his hip pocket, and extended it towards me smilingly. “I bought it in
Winnipeg as I came through. It is said to be the best, as well as the
latest, thing in quick-firing. I carry it loaded, of course, though I
understand I am breaking the law of the country by doing so; but I am
sure you would be the last to condemn my action, because you know what
rascals there are about this land--it contains the scum of the earth,
Petrie, I do assure you. Then, you see, I am elderly and weak, and
almost as nervous as any old woman.”

He finished this speech with a deprecatory smile, and returned the
weapon to its accustomed place in a dexterous fashion, as though well
accustomed to the use of it.

“I guess you’re going?” I said, keeping down my madness by a great
effort.

“Well, I suppose so. These partings are included among the petty
troubles of living. Ah, Petrie, if I were you! Lucky man! young and
strong, with all your life ahead. Look at me, old and poor, though,
by Gad! it seems only a year ago that I was sent down from Oxford
for defying the dons, as they termed it, in their injustice. Well,
good-bye, my boy. Take care always to steer clear of Olaffson. By the
way, I’m thinking of crossing the lake to hunt for gold.”

He stood in the light, looking down at me slowly.

I could not answer him--I could not! I had no learning and no wit to
make reply to this calm, cynical gentleman, who had come merely to
enjoy the sight of my degradation. He stepped upon the rope-ladder,
pushed himself out, the smoke of his cigar lingering; but before
replacing the lumber, his loose face appeared again, and he said:

“If I don’t call again, Petrie, and I fully intend to give myself that
pleasure, you will understand that I have been prevented by pressing
business. This is such an out-of-the-way place, and of course, it is
very difficult to get at. Good-bye, and good luck!” Once more he looked
back to shout “The weather’s grand!”

Darkness came after the sunshine, and the night followed, but Redpath
did not come back. The hours went by, taking with them another day,
and silence and loneliness were my meat and drink. When the night came
again I understood more clearly as vitality ebbed out of me. I was
abandoned to starvation in this old stone ruin of the bush.




CLERICAL ERRORS


I had shouted for hours, as it seemed to me, in the frail hope of
guiding some wandering Indian to my prison, until my throat went
dry, and my swollen tongue filled my mouth. The loneliness remained
unbroken. My wild voice broke against the stone roof, to fall back upon
me in fragments of wasted echoes. All this effort was unprofitable; I
was doomed. I was a missing man; my little course was to run out in
that mysterious ruin, and my bones were to be added to its antiquities.

That which tormented me more than the desire for vengeance, more even
than the fear of death, was my utter helplessness--liberty was so near
to me. In my normal state I could so easily have jumped to catch the
square hole, and so dragged myself out to the roof; but I was pinioned,
and my arms, with all their muscle that I had learnt to be proud of,
were the first part of me to die.

I sank slowly into a sleep which was not sleep, until a time came when
the pale moon lit and stabbed one shivering ray into my prison. I
writhed along the ground like some poor beast which has been shot in
the hinder part, and bathed my fevered face in that light. Anything for
the world again! My eyes were sore, my half-bandaged wounds stabbed
me, red spots spun confusedly wherever I looked. I was afraid of the
great loneliness, which suggested the more fearful silence I was about
to enter. As I sank towards oblivion I prayed for the sound of a voice,
even the growl of a beast or a bird-call, even a sad voice from the
grave.

I shook off the stupor, and called aloud once more. It was not a shout
for help, but a shout of fear. The horror of the great shadow was over
me.

The echoes had hardly settled down into the dust before my nerves,
strung to a terrible tension, thrilled and started with the shock of a
voice, and my ears caught the answering sound of a feeble cry out of
the night.

“Rupe! Boy Rupe!”

“MacCaskill,” I muttered in a delirium.

Animal-like scrapings came against the outer wall; a beating upon
the stones, a great groan, and then a mad burst of laughter. Soon an
unearthly voice began to sing the song of joy, called the National
Anthem of the English. The wild sounds made the night tumultuous:

  “_Kitche milweletuk Kinwaish
      Pimetesit. O Pimache!_”

How had this native singer found me? How did he know my name?

It was a bright night, and the wind was in the south. On such a night
the spirits of the dead are abroad, singing their songs of gladness. I
was about to die. I was able to hear, as I came near to join them.

“God save the Queen!” wailed the voice, but now in English. Whether
this Queen were a living personage or a tutelary spirit, I did not
know. A scream made the air start, and then the sounds made words--“Me
son Rupe! Me son!”

Now it dawned upon my failing brain that my father had come back, and
because I was not yet dead, I feared to meet him. Cry after cry pierced
the moonlight, with some weird laughter, and the sounds of an old man’s
trouble. The tumult seemed to me so great that I turned and weakly
muttered, “There must be a multitude, and they are all dead.” I tried
to turn my voice upward in the call, “Father!”

The wandering voice spoke and answered clearly:

“Comin’, Rupe. Have patience wi’ me, boy. I’ve ben a-lookin’ ev’ry
night. Ay, ay, ev’ry night a-lookin’, an’ a-watchin’, an’ a-callin’.
Ole father’s found ye.”

I could make nothing of this. My father had only been dead a short
time. There was a scuffling upon the roof, and the old spirit went on
yelling the National Hymn, and danced to his own mad music. I then
heard the angry scratching of his nails upon the roof of my prison.

“They hid the boy away here!” screamed the voice, shrill and cunning.
“I tried to stop ’em, but they wouldn’t have it. They said, ‘Git, ole
man!’ He was jest tired wi’ fightin’, was the boy. I could tell he’d
wake after a while. Rupe!”

I shouted back, alive and conscious at last.

A great stone crashed down, and the lumber bounded and splintered.
Piece by piece the prison bars disappeared, and the cool moonlight
dropped upon me. In vain I tried to move. I could not see my rescuer,
but I realised that he was happily seated at what he thought was the
entrance to my grave. His voice was hoarser, when he bent down to call,
“Rupe! They’re a-comin’ up all round!”

He went on:

“Bide low, while they clear away a bit. They’re screechin’ awful along
the creek, an’ the blue lights are jumpin’ crazy. I knew the dead were
around to-night. Bones were rattlin’ dreadful when I come out. There
was crowds of stiff ’uns a-whisperin’, an’ a-laughin’, an’ a-tumblin’
around in the air, as crazy as sand-bugs. I looked for ye among ’em.
An’ I come out a-calling after ye. Bide a while, boy; I’m restin’ a
piece, afore pullin’ the earth off ye.”

Slowly it came to my tired brain that I was being saved by a madman who
had lost a son bearing my name.

The cunning voice above went on:

“I told ’em I’d find ye, an’ ’twas no use talkin’. I said, ‘Boys all!
Rupe’ll come back one midnight. Ole moon’ll be good and full a-comin’
over yon ledges, an’ ole south wind’ll blow soft, an’ the tree
heads’ll start to jump. I’ll come along the Creek o’ Corpses a-callin’
Rupe, an’ I’ll find me boy. Sure, I’ll find him, an’ we’ll go home
together to the ole home on the lake.’”

The voice had been pathetic, but it altered sharply and became angry.

“She’s ben a-followin’ me ev’ry night, Rupe. She seemed lost to-night,
an’ she looked only a girl. She was a-comin’ this way--a-comin’ after
me, Rupe, a-comin’ to keep you down in the ground. You mind the squaw,
who fit worse’n a man, Rupe. You mind she wounded ye in the leg. You
didn’t see it out. Listen, boy! Listen to ole father!”

His voice became a scream.

“I’ll tell ye, Rupe. There was a man who fit wi’ a bush-axe, an’ doin’
good, I tell ye, a-knockin’ ’em around fine, an’ the squaw made at him.
Eh! like a beast, boy, like a wil’ beast. She’d fixed her few, but
this ’un was too slick. He jumped ’way back, an’ when she come on with
her big cutter he dropped his axe, an’ she dropped--ay, dropped, an’
doubled, an’ kicked once, an’ never used her knife again. I was that
man, Rupe.”

His shrill laughter rang out triumphantly.

“I set down, Rupe, ’cause we was beatin’ ’em fast, an’ I was winded,
being oldish. I got lookin’ around, an’ come to see a stiff’un a-lyin’
close up. He was only a boy, you might say. Wounded ter’ble he was, an’
lettin’ the blood run outer him like smoke outer a stove-pipe. You was
that man, Rupe.”

He cut short his mad laughter, and I heard him move.

Two crooked hands came weirdly through the aperture, and the voice
shouted at me.

For a moment I forgot the madman in the horror of the thought that
Redpath might be near. My feeble heart seemed to be stopping, and a
succession of dreadful screams beat into my ears and realised my dread.

“She’s found us, Rupe! The squaw’s a-comin’!”

I was so fearfully weak that I even laughed at his grotesque fear.
Probably the woman he feared so greatly was some crooked shadow cast by
the moon.

Then another voice came out of the night to tell me that the madman’s
eyes were true--a soft voice, not of the dead, nor of the insane, but
of the loving and living.

“I am hungry, and very tired. I have searched for three days, and this
is the third night. I heard your voice in the bush, and so I have come.”

The world was mine again!

The old man sobbed, and panted, and screamed, and would not allow the
girl to come near. I could hear him running and howling, as she tried
to out-manœuvre him; but I was beyond aiding myself. I could not have
stood or walked had the walls fallen away from me.

“Let me go to him!” pleaded Akshelah; but the maniac, with his
superstitious fears, would not hear of it. “Then I must fight you,”
said my maid.

As I had lately fought Jake Peterssen for her good fame, so now
Akshelah fought the madman for my life.

How long they actually contended I do not know, because Akshelah would
never tell me, but presently a light footstep ran overhead, a lithe
figure dropped through the hole, and Akshelah knelt beside me. She did
not speak, she had not the breath; but she freed my dead arms, and,
supporting my head upon her shoulder, gave me water of life out of a
little bottle. It seemed nothing but a taste, but more might have done
me harm.

She took from her bosom a little meat and bread, which she had brought
from Gull, and though starving herself, had never touched, and fed me
sparingly. She wiped my face, and chafed my arms with her soothing
little hands, and while she worked to restore me I felt something
dripping upon my face from hers. The maniac’s long nails had scored
deep marks upon her cheeks and forehead.

When I awoke from the long sleep into which she had soothed me it was
day. I felt weak and miserably ill, but this illness was due to life
returning, and not lessening; from finger-tips to shoulders my arms
were two separate tortures. Close beside me Akshelah lay curled up in
the sleep of exhaustion, her poor little brown face dreadfully stained
and pinched, and my heart cut me. Had this girl been wise she would
have remained in the shaded encampment among her own people, instead of
following my fortunes, to risk dangers by land and water, privations,
insults, death itself; and for what? Because she fancied I wanted
her? Because she had promised to be always my friend? Because she was
happier with me in danger than in comfort when I was away? Despite
all my ignorance, I thought that this last might prove to be the true
reason.

Directly she woke, worn and wan, the girl began to laugh, and
mirthfully assured me that life was very enjoyable, even when one was
next door to starvation. My maid went on laughing when I expressed
a fear that Redpath might return, and she went on to tell me of the
notices posted about Gull Island, offering a reward for information
concerning me, and of MacCaskill, whom she had left running wild, but
“no good.”

Then she swung herself from the prison, and I passed an anxious hour,
which I employed in trying to use my limbs. I had quite forgotten the
half-breed madman until Akshelah came back.

“He is asleep in the grass, and bitten all over with flies,” she said.
“He is just where I sent him. I hit him like you hit the black man.”

Soon I heard scrapings and whinings, and the feeble voice demanding
where I might be found.

“We are close to the great water,” said Akshelah. “Look at the berries
I have brought you.”

We ate the rich red berries, and drank the sweet water, while the
madman muttered and crawled overhead. When we had done, I declared that
I could move. Akshelah divided her red shawl in the middle, and having
secured the ends, tied one part about me under my arms. Climbing out,
she instructed the guardian of the “grave” to lay hold and pull. Now
that it was daylight, he had lost his great fear of her, and obeyed,
pulling wildly, until I was brought back to liberty.

The stone building stood upon a clear circular space, some four hundred
yards in diameter, the circumference being the dense lumber forest.
Round my late prison a broken circle of huge monoliths occupied the
turf, some erect, some leaning, others recumbent; in later years I
saw in a book an illustration representing a similar circle of such
stones, which this book informed me were to be found at a place called
Stonehenge, somewhere in England. On the south side I could see the
beginning of the dip, which the old man called the Creek of Corpses.
Formerly, I presume, a fight had taken place in the neighbourhood
between the natives and the Hudson Bay Company, and the dead had been
buried along this creek. Redpath had discovered this spot, which formed
the centre of a veritable natural labyrinth, as he had a faculty for
finding out most things, and had conjectured that it would make a safe
and suitable place to entomb me in return for the blow I had given him.

It became a problem how to rid myself of the ragged, hairy old creature
who clung to my arm, babbling unceasingly. At length I decided to
go with him, because he had a log hut near the beach, and I was too
weak to walk any distance. We made our way by easy stages through
the forest, until a strong sheet of light flashed before us, and I
felt that I was indeed alive. I shared all the native love, and in
part their superstition, for the water; and here it was--bright and
beautiful Lake Peace! My exclamation found its echo from the mad hermit
who claimed me for his son:

“You mind it, Rupe? Course you mind it! Round the point, jest roun’
yon tamarac bluff, there’s the ole shanty same as ever. You mind our
fishin’ nights, when the moon was good, an’ how we pulled out the
white-fish? Mind ole Bill Alloway, wi’ his face like a cat-fish? Mind
one time, when we was fishin’, an’ Bill Alloway pulls off his shirt
an’ pants, an’ swims an’ dives around? Sudden, yer line gits a holt
on something big, an’ you pulls an ole cat-fish half outer the water
in the moonlight. ‘Father,’ ye lets out, ‘father! Darned if I haven’t
caught ole Bill Alloway!’”

The old man tumbled upon the grass, laughing, and picked the white moss.

His shanty stood on the edge of the cliff, where the tamaracs overhung
the rocks, and a wonderful white beach, a hundred yards in width, and
fantastically marked with the pattern of webbed feet, ran down to the
lake. The hut was so dirty that we made a camp outside. I quickly
caught some white-fish, thus proving my skill as a fisherman, despite
my failure on the evening when I first met Akshelah. When night had
fallen, the girl left me to find her way to Gull. The old man’s madness
came on again with the moon, and he implored me to escape with him,
so that I had little sleep; but I could not be hard upon the poor
creature, because, had it not been for him, Akshelah would probably
never have found me, or have only done so when Redpath would have been
satisfied with my state.

In the morning, when the lake was a cold grey, and the white mist hung
in ghost-wreaths, Akshelah returned, and brought MacCaskill, weary and
short of breath, with her.

Between the saw-mills and the shingle beach which brought out to Gull
Island was a long building of rough lumber, roofed with shingles.
Over the entrance appeared a long board, bearing in large, irregular
capitals the information, “Tommy’s Restaurant-Hotel.” Underneath hung a
square board, upon which was inscribed the tariff of the house, which
read, according to MacCaskill, exactly as follows:--

  Square Meal                                25c.
  One-Day-Filler                             50c.
  Gorge                                      75c.
  Straight Drink                             20c.
  Mixed Drink                                25c.
  Bed                                        1dol.

           No Bugs, unless you bring ’em.

We reached this rough but isolated hostelry about midnight, the four of
us, because the madman followed me persistently, and we went inside to
rest. MacCaskill explored the silent house, and when he returned, his
face looked as though he had received a fright.

“Come wi’ me,” he whispered. “Take hold of me arm, and walk careful.
Don’t let ’em see you.”

Along the passage were several compartments reserved for gambling, and
we could look into any of these without well being seen, because the
passage was unlighted, and the tobacco smoke inside hung in clouds.
In the compartment indicated by the factor I saw a poker four deep in
their game, and I was able to name each man.

The gamblers were--Jim Morrison, the sailor who had accosted me from
the car my first morning in Gull; Gedeon Leblanc, the half-breed;
Olaffson, the unmitigated scoundrel; and the man who had called himself
Father Lacombe, the well-known missionary of Three Points.




III

ON A FRESHWATER SEA




MORNING


At last the rumbling motion overhead had ceased. The hum of the screw
and the beat of the engine, with the back-wash of the water as the keel
slipped through, told me that the _Carillon_ had cast off from Gull
Harbour, and was away on her north-eastern trip for the Little Peace
River.

I rose from my recumbent position behind the fish barrels in the hold,
but I went down again, and as promptly as though a pistol had been
levelled at my forehead. A couple of sailors stood together in the
half-light, and I had recognised them at once as the half-breed Leblanc
and the ill-favoured Morrison, who had presumably slipped away together
from deck, so soon as their labours were over, that they might discuss
certain plans of their own out of earshot.

“Gimme a bite of eatin’ tobaccer,” growled Morrison at the outset, and
set me reflecting that the man was always asking for something. I heard
the shuffling of cowhide shoes, followed by sundry unhealthy sounds
of expectoration, then the same voice said, “There’s a-goin’ to be
scrappin’?”

“You min’ yer talk. See, Bill? If you’d ben made wi’ no tongue you’d be
better fixed right now.”

I reflected that Leblanc was master here.

“When I talk, I watch who listens. Gimme a drop o’ liquor.”

“Ain’t got none.”

The men shuffled closer to my hiding-place.

“Do we scrap, or don’t us?” demanded Jim Morrison.

“We don’t have to,” said Leblanc. “It’s skin eyes and shut mouth. When
they done the findin’, than up we come. See?”

“Say, but what about this Redpath? Teaser, ain’t he?”

“Do what he tells ye, Jim,” said the half-breed, and I could tell by
his voice that he was ill at ease. “Redpath don’t have no monkeyin’. If
we ain’t clean to him, he’ll start to work an’ snuff us out, same as
he’s done to Rupe Petrie. If he says ‘Lick me boots,’ we goter lick.
See?”

“Will I talk to Olaffson?” suggested Jim Morrison. “Maybe he’d come
useful.”

Leblanc grunted.

“He’ll chalk his own track. There’s only one man, ’sides Redpath, what
could spile us, an’ he’s ben spilt hisself. He could have bruke the lot
of us, same as he bruke Jake Peterssen.”

“Ole Mac, he ain’t no sort er good?” muttered Morrison.

“No sort, now his pard’s gone.”

“Gimme a match.”

A high-pitched voice came sounding into the hold, and I recognised the
cry of Sandy, the mate.

The men separated at once, climbing out of the hold at opposite ends;
while I jumped over the barrels, and stretched myself in the open,
feeling strong and fit again.

MacCaskill and I had foreseen that the ship would be full of plotting,
but I had now learnt that the cross-plots were likely to prove of a
more serious nature than we had anticipated.

Leblanc knew something of old Fagge’s secret, and he had taken Morrison
into his confidence; while assuming to be in abject submission to
Redpath, they were planning how to best him. I was sorry for them.

In determining the position, I made it out to be that Leblanc and
Morrison were against everyone; MacCaskill and myself against Redpath
and the Icelander, with, incidentally, the two thick-skulled sailors;
Redpath always for himself; Olaffson nominally for the adventurer,
actually for himself. MacCaskill and myself formed the only genuine
alliance, with Akshelah to aid us, and I felt we were good enough to
carry the position.

After recognising Redpath under the disguise of Father Lacombe, the
factor made the plan to keep me hidden. He had brought me on board the
_Carillon_, and stowed me away below the night before sailing; while
he had come aboard in the ordinary way with Akshelah, who, of course,
could not be induced to return to Yellow Sands.

It was while waiting for the vessel to get well out to sea from Gull
that I had overheard the conversation between the two sailors.

Swinging myself up out of the hold, I made along the lower deck,
enjoying the prospect of the consternation my presence must cause.

Suddenly a very different voice came to me.

One more step over the greasy boards, and I caught a side glance of the
entrance to the engine-room, and my heart went a little faster, because
I had seen the abrupt flicker of a black skirt.

Scarcely five yards away, blocking the entry, stood my hereditary
enemy, his back towards me, still preserving the disguise of the
black-bearded priest.

Without a sound, I seated myself upon one of the numerous barrels,
full in the open, the gloom of the ship falling behind me. I knew that
Redpath must turn and see me sitting there, silent and motionless, with
my eyes fixed upon him. I thought it possible that the sight might
scare him pretty badly.

Thus situated, I could hear the adventurer speak, and at the same time
I imagined that the engineer could not be very happy at being examined
by this particular passenger.

It was impossible to hear Pete’s replies, but Redpath’s questions were
sufficiently audible.

“You must often find the heat down here intolerable?” he suggested,
in his kindly tones. “Ah, yes, it would reduce a fat man considerably.
While the weather remains as at present you must find your duty a
pleasure. What? No, I did not observe the sound. My ears are not
trained like yours.”

He stepped back until he was quite outside the engine-room, and I made
certain that he would turn and discover me. But after listening, he
returned to his former position, and went on:

“I suppose we must expect a fresher wind, now that we are approaching
the open sea. Ah, I heard it then. What effect does the moving of that
lever have?”

He waited for the reply, which was inaudible to me, and continued with
increased interest:

“For reducing the pressure. I see. If you desired to lower the speed so
as to stop the vessel? Yes. And for starting? Ah, I quite understand.
What? Shift the lever gently and gradually, as she gains way. Ah, yes,
it is all very interesting, and equally instructive. To a man of my
calling, a very full, general knowledge becomes indispensable. It will
be obvious to you that at some future date a contingency might possibly
befal, which would make it imperative upon me to understand how to
control such a vessel as this. The knowledge you are now giving me in
an idle moment might well lead to the saving of many precious human
lives. Thank you, my son!”

How could the man do it?

A great wave flung itself against the side; and when it had beaten
back, Redpath was saying:

“Quite so. I can easily believe that in the hour of danger the
engineer’s position becomes especially full of peril. Now, if this fair
weather continues, when may I expect to be landed at the mouth of the
Little Peace?”

I suppose the engineer referred to the chance of delay, because the
adventurer said presently:

“You need not remind me. I know this dangerous lake, with its
mysterious storms, which, as you say, spring up suddenly under a clear
sky, and vanish with the speed of their coming. I have heard so many
sad tales from my own flock, so many poor Indian fishermen lost, so
many lumber scows wrecked. It is very pitiful!”

The rascal coughed sanctimoniously. His back was still towards me; I
wondered that he had not felt my presence so very near to him.

A big shaft of light fell through the hatchway ahead, and suddenly a
couple of burly legs appeared on the ladder in that light. Then Factor
MacCaskill trod heavily down, and saw me when he had made a few paces;
and he saw also the mock priest between us, and was quick-witted enough
to grasp the situation, and clever enough to use it to the full. He
checked himself abruptly when a couple of short paces divided him from
Redpath, and his glance went heedlessly past the masquerader, to settle
upon me with a well-simulated expression of fear and amazement.

“Golden gates of Jerusalem!” called the old fellow, making his voice
thick and unsteady, and allowing his pipe to drop upon the deck.

The adventurer swung round between us, and in one moment his face
became like the underpart of a fish. The flesh seemed to shrink up
under its covering of false hair, and his eyes were like two little
pits of oil. He had confessed that his body was weak--he had almost
boasted of it--but his will was like steel. For the moment only it
bent, and the next was strong again. His eyes left me and settled upon
MacCaskill, and the factor looked him back like an honest man, without
yielding an inch or ceding a wink. I left my barrel, and stepped
forward with all the indifference I could muster.

“Where in the name of everything upon earth have ye sprung from, Rupe?”
exclaimed MacCaskill.

“I only stowed myself among the cargo,” I said, for the benefit of
listeners. Then I turned towards Redpath and Pete, who put his startled
face out of the hot oil-smelling recess, “How are you, father?” I said,
with all the confidence of having the stronger hand.

The adventurer stuck to the rules of his game.

“My dear young man!” he exclaimed, with splendid affection, emphasising
each syllable with ease and unction. “This is, indeed, a joyful
surprise. Why, we have all been in mourning for you!”




AFTERNOON


Lennie’s mask-like face became animated when I was introduced at
dinner-time into the deck-cabin where meals were served. Questions
began to buzz about my ears like mosquitoes on a damp evening. I told
the story of my kidnapping, although I professed to be ignorant of my
captors’ names, and when I had said all I intended to, the captain
began to talk.

“Jake Peterssen never done it,” he stated. “You beat Jake, an’ he took
his beatin’. There wasn’t one madder than him when ’twas told you’d ben
misplaced. No, sir, Jake was fair spoilin’ to fix the man what took you
foul. He said right through you’d ben took foul. Ain’t that so, Pete?”

Pete acquiesced, and Lennie disregarded his dinner and talked on.

“Well, now, there’s ben strange doings at Gull this trip.” He lowered
his voice, peered about, and whispered, “Where’s the father?”

“Outside,” said the steward. “Said he wasn’t wantin’ his grub till some
of ye was through.”

Lennie became mysterious.

“Some of ye must have heard tell of Father Lacombe of Three Points.
They say he’s a priest what always wants to stretch the days out at
work, and don’t have no use for settin’ around. They do say he’s
a-goin’ to be next archbishop, ’cause he went to a place called
Rome two year ago, a-payin’ calls on ole Father Holiness. Well,
now, we don’t give a darn whether he’s goin’ to be archbishop or
church-scraper; but here’s the trouble: What’s the father’s racket
a-bummin’ around Gull these days on the idle, watchin’ the boys at
scrap, and going inter Tommy’s Restaurant wi’ a bad crowd? Tommy
wouldn’t get to give him away, ’cause that sort of thing ain’t
bis’ness; but some of the boys saw him go in along wi’ toughs. Well,
there’s that, an’ there’s the boy bein’ took foul, an’ there’s that
steamer.”

It became my turn to ask a question.

“We’d got away from Gull this mornin’, when Sandy sights a steamer
runnin’ at the island from the south,” went on Lennie sadly. “She was
comin’ full rip, an’ not flyin’ any flag far as we could see. Sandy
made out she was the _Firefly_ of the Force, but I’ll take me oath she
was the _Sault Ste. Marie_ of the Hudson Bay. Don’t matter which she
was. What does she want around Gull, anyhow? This is the only boat that
goes to Gull, ’cept the lumber scows.”

Lennie looked round the table sourly, and went on:

“We’re goin’ to have a bad trip. That’s a dead sure thing. When I set
down to breakfast before startin’ I found a flap-bug in me porridge.
Takes a black dog wi’ a wall-eye to beat that for luck.”

After dinner MacCaskill and I talked upon deck, while Akshelah sat
herself in the sun, her deft fingers engaged in repairing certain
ravages in my coat. The factor thought that the opposition threatened
by Leblanc and Morrison would be more likely to benefit than to injure
us. “Sort of divides the aces,” was his comment. He went on to impress
upon me the necessity for deceiving Redpath by making him believe that
he was deceiving us, and here I had a question to ask, because I wanted
to learn how the adventurer had come by his disguise.

“It’s as clear as sky, Rupe, that he brought the fixings along to
Yellow Sands,” the factor said. “He’s ben playin’ some lively game down
east, or down south, and havin’ to get out at a small hole he fixed
himself up as a priest and came north for his health. Likely he didn’t
change that rig until he got to Yellow Sands River, and heard tell of
ole Petrie. By that time he reckoned he’d show up as his own ugly self.”

I was for telling Lennie the truth, but MacCaskill, who knew the world,
pointed out danger. Redpath would never allow himself to be taken
without bloodshed. Even if placed under confinement, he would possibly
win over the crew by promising to share his secret with them. By this
time I began to understand what men will do for “the dirt.” A mutiny
might follow, and we should certainly be worsted.

“We’ll have a chance to get ahead of him,” went on the factor. “The
_Carillon_ drops us at the Little Peace, and from there we work our way
north along the coast.”

He called to Akshelah.

“Know what sort of folk live at the mouth of the river, my gal?”

Akshelah looked up, her eyes full of thought, and said presently:

“If the people of Mekawask are there, they are our friends.”

“They will let us have a big canoe?”

“I will get you a canoe,” said the girl proudly.

“And Redpath will steal one,” added the factor morosely.

“I will tell the tribe,” went on the girl. “They will watch their
canoes, and if the man comes to steal, they will shoot at him.”

MacCaskill chuckled, “I guess we’ve got his reverence.”

Hardly had he spoken when the man himself came out of the cabin, and
began to pace the deck on the opposite side to us. His cassock was held
up behind by a safety-pin, and he wore the hard felt hat in which he
had landed at Gull. He carried his disguise well.

That he was promenading with a motive beyond mere exercise was soon
made evident; he gave a side movement with his head. I could not be
sure that he was signalling me, but when I made no response, he boldly
beckoned me with his hand.

“See what his game is, but don’t let him fool you, or take you from
deck,” said MacCaskill.

“If you go to him I shall come with you,” said Akshelah, flinging down
my coat, her eyes lighting. “He will overcome you with his eye, and
throw you into the water.”

“Stop where you are,” I ordered, quite sharply, but apparently young
women delight in disobedience.

Akshelah immediately rose up and accompanied me.

I felt a sense of shrinking as I came up to the big, strong-willed man.
His keen eyes passed over me, before he spoke in his courteous manner.

“Can we not dispense with the--er--young lady, Petrie?”

He was not going to play the priest with me, because he understood that
I had seen through his disguise.

Akshelah faced him at once.

“I am going to stay here,” she said angrily.

The adventurer nodded and smiled at me.

“A positive young Xantippe, my dear fellow. Do you speak French?”

I did not know what he meant, but rightly replied in the negative, and
motioned Akshelah to stand a little aside. She took her stand to the
right of me, watching Redpath unflinchingly. Farther along I could see
the factor’s straw bonnet bobbing up and down excitedly.

“Have you anything to say to me?” I said, feeling how much rather I
would openly fight with this man, because when it came to a contest of
tongues I had no chance.

“In the first place, I have to congratulate you upon your escape from
Olaffson and his gang of rascals,” said Redpath heartily. “I did what
I could for you. Little, I confess, but I was powerless to do more. By
the way, did this disguise deceive you at all?”

“Yes, at first.”

I tried not to be staggered at his coolness.

“I never intended to deceive you. I was compelled to assume
these--er--priestly habiliments in order that I might be able to
conceal my identity from our mutual enemies. The plan succeeded well
enough with these unobservant creatures, though I never flattered
myself that I had misled an intellectual and social equal.” He was
playing with his false beard while he spoke. “I had more than one
narrow escape myself, which I will tell you of later--these wretched
men are so suspicious.” He came a little closer, his glance falling
upon MacCaskill in the distance. “You think your servant is to be
trusted?”

I knew that he was playing with me, yet I could not retaliate upon this
calm, cynical gentleman. He managed to exert a marvellous power over
me. I answered him as meekly as possible.

“He is my friend, and I know I can trust him.”

Redpath looked surprised, and a little concerned.

“My dear fellow,” he said, in a deeper voice, “are you quite prudent?
Pardon me. I do not question the sincerity of your motives, but do you
think you are wise? The man is palpably not of our station in life. He
looks simple and good-hearted, but it really never pays to take a man
of so humble an origin into full confidence. I feel sure you have acted
for the best, but, as your partner in this enterprise, I feel called
upon to offer a word of advice, if not warning. You must remember I
am older than you, and I have been deceived so often.” He sighed, and
shook his head mournfully. “It is pitiful to think how often I have
been deceived. Even your own father, Petrie--better man never breathed,
and yet he wronged me bitterly, dear fellow! How often I have sighed
the reproachful utterance of the old poet, ‘It was even thou, my
companion!’”

He turned from me, and fixed his false eyes upon the flickering lights
and colours of the water.

All that I could say was:

“Are you going to keep up your disguise all the trip?”

“I have no choice,” came the answer. “Only you and your--I should say
our--servant, with this young lady, will know that I am not Father
Lacombe, of the upland mission. My dear fellow, I am exercising all my
ingenuity to conceal my identity from Olaffson and Leblanc, the latter
a loose-tongued scoundrel who knows far more than he ought, and who
goes about the ship dropping hints among his miserable associates. Any
one of them would murder either of us cheerfully if they were to gain
by doing so.”

I pulled myself together.

“You were with them in Tommy’s Restaurant. You were playing poker with
them.”

If I had thought to abash him, I had made a mistake.

“Yes,” he said, with his quiet, kindly smile. “It was all I could do
for you, my boy. I kept the three scoundrels engaged, hoping you might
escape in the meantime, and as events transpired, you succeeded in
doing so. I understand that some of the priests do mix with the men
upon their stations, and play cards with them, in order that they may
get into closer touch. I chose that place because it happened to be
well away from Gull, and I was the less likely to be noticed. It was
somewhat of a strain to sustain my character before men who know me
as myself, but as you managed to escape, I am amply rewarded for the
endeavour.”

My reasoning powers fell to pieces. Both MacCaskill and I had
recognised Redpath in the gambling compartment, because he was sitting
in the light, with his hat off, and we could see the upper part of
his face. The mere fact of his being shut up with Olaffson and the
two sailors was sufficient proof for us. The man could hardly want to
deceive his own confederates. My disgust at the impudence of the lie
gave me courage to say:

“You tell me that you were playing poker with the men, while they never
knew who you were?”

“My dear fellow!”--he had a superior, yet pleasant, way of saying
this--“of course they knew. They still believe, all three of them, that
I am the Reverend Gabriel Lacombe, head of the upland mission of Three
Points, a very worthy priest, although sufficiently worldly to take a
well-earned holiday--shall we say gold-hunting?”




EVENING


Akshelah looked very handsome as she sat on a clean brown coil of rope,
with all the colours of the evening playing round her head. I had been
silent for so long that my maid at last sought to learn the cause. I
told her that I had been thinking of home, and I was sure that Antoine
would allow the thistles to take possession of my clearing. Then
Akshelah told me a secret.

“After you had gone away my father called the people together,” she
said, with startling gravity. “The new factor lent axes, and the men
were cutting the logs along Split Leaf Creek when I came away in my
canoe.”

The girl looked at me and laughed, and I had to ask what she meant.

“The chief promised that your new home should be ready before the
ending of Nepin; and when my father says a thing, it is done. But
Antoine said you would never come back.”

These were the people who had sworn to give me their friendship!
Akshelah went on regarding me with her fawn-like eyes.

“Ah, I know,” she said quickly, delighted at having caught the
impression. “You see no owls.”

She meant I was suffering from home-sickness. When a camp moves to new
ground there are no owl visitors at first, and the people think of
their late home where the birds came each night.

“I am glad,” said the girl; but when I asked why, she only said again,
“I am glad,” and laughed and sang until MacCaskill came up, large and
hot.

Now Akshelah was not overwhelmed with affection for MacCaskill, whom
she considered too serious a being for her world; so she went on
singing, by way of protest at his having added himself to our company,
and called down upon herself the rebuff, “Quit your noise, gal!” Then
she said petulantly:

“It is the song of the god of the green mantles.”

“Well, quit it,” said the factor. “I’ve no use for it. Gals are always
a-worryin’ ye,” he muttered morosely. “They’ll worry on the Day of
Judgment, an’ after that if they ain’t stopped. Don’t matter where ye
go, there they are, a-waitin’ to worry ye, first chance, or no chance
at all.”

The old fellow was upset. He had been scouting below, and had
encountered Olaffson, resting after a spell of stoking. The Icelander
had answered every question with astonishing readiness. He had owned
that he was following the fortunes of Father Lacombe, but having no
money, was working his passage. Men were not plentiful, and the great
majority preferred the well-paid labour of the lumber and fishing
stations to the poor pay and hard life upon the dangerous sea. The
unprincipled Olaffson had reiterated his willingness to devote himself,
body and soul, to our service, and finally had sworn entire ignorance
as to the whereabouts of Redpath.

“I thought the little skunk was a fool,” MacCaskill burst forth,
“guessin’ Redpath supplied the brains of the business. It ain’t so,
Rupe. Olaffson swore how Redpath had left him before they got to Gull,
promising to meet him there, but never came to time. Swore he hadn’t
set eyes on him since.”

“He’s lying,” I said.

“Course he’s lyin’. It’s the way he does it that worries me.”

A party came to join us, Lennie, the mate, Dave second engineer, and
the steward, old and greasy, with fish scales clinging to his bare
arms. Before the convivial plug of tobacco had finished its first
round, the mock priest himself appeared, holding the skirt of his
cassock in a long white hand. The officers of the ship obsequiously
made space.

“What a magnificent evening!” murmured the adventurer, as he took his
place among us.

What was his plan?

I was too well accustomed to the radiant atmosphere of my country to
give particular notice to the sunset. The warmth was perfect; the
ship slipped freely through the tinted water; there were scarcely any
insects; over the west blazed the red, the gold, and the blue.

Lennie extended awkwardly the ragged plug torn by many teeth, with the
invitation:

“Will ye chew, father?”

“I never chew,” came the answer. “But I am not prohibited from smoking.”

MacCaskill peered across, and grunted audibly.

Beside the starboard beam behind me some sailors were coiling ropes,
and I heard a hoarse voice exclaim, “Gimme a match!” so I knew that Jim
Morrison was near.

The presence of the supposed priest stopped conversation. Having
lighted his pipe, Redpath looked over the silent group in his gracious
manner, then, clasping his fingers together, leaning forward, looking
at the sunset, he said:

“Let me hear the experiences of some of you. The mind is necessarily
active at evening time. Having lived much in the solitude, each one
of you must have felt, at some time or another, the power exerted by
solitude upon the imagination.”

The men looked unhappy, because this kind of talk was far beyond them.
Dave slewed his head round, and whispered to me:

“If the father would curse a bit, I’d make him out, maybe.”

Then Lennie stirred, and spoke for the credit of his position and his
ship.

“I ain’t used to company wi’ priests, father,” he said apologetically,
“but I did run agin a reg’lar boss one time, and I guess it’s the sort
of experience you’re after. ’Twas away down Grande Marais, time they
struck that find of copper. One evening I walked around to take a look
at the place, an’ struck an oldish chap, a-settin’ on a heap of wash,
an’ a-rubbin’ his leg. He was in long leggings, an’ a soft hat, an’
a flannel shirt, an’ a strap ’bout his middle, an’ I made out he was
a miner, though I allow he didn’t talk like one. We give each other
the nod and the good weather, an’ I said to him, ‘What’s your line,
stranger?’ an’ he said, sort o’ bashful, ‘Well, I’m a bishop come
to visit the miners.’ I got a-laughin’ at that, an’ course I wasn’t
a-goin’ to be beat, so I spoke up. ‘Ye don’t want to talk about it,
ole boy, but I’m jest a crowned head come around to patronise the
circuses.’ Then he set a-laughin’ fit to choke. But I tell ye, anyone
could have folded me up small, an’ stuffed me away inter a hand-grip,
when the boys come to tell me that same night how the ole chap was a
bishop.”

A short laugh went up, but evidently the men belonging to the ship had
heard the story before.

“You have not altogether grasped my meaning,” went on the soft voice,
in mild reproof. “It was my idea to learn how solitude affects your
minds individually. Let me give you a personal illustration.”

He kept his eyes upon the ever-changing colours on the water, and the
men looked at one another in distress.

“Experience in a lonely mission, even with much to occupy my thoughts,
has shown me that solitude makes a man dream. They are strange things
these dreams, and harmful if allowed to dominate the mind, but the
unhappy part of it is that they pass rapidly, leaving merely a sense of
melancholy, which, I am ashamed to say, will sometimes interfere with
duty.”

The adventurer bent his head, coughed, then proceeded:

“One cannot hold and retain these fancies, any more than one can detain
and fasten down a shadow. The entire charm of a dream is for the
dreamer. He can think over it and enjoy it, but if he be rash enough
to undertake a description he will find he can neither begin, nor
continue, nor end. He has, in short, nothing to talk about. We have
this dream-like picture of Nature around us now.” He threw his two
hands away from him. “Let us suppose that the most graphic writer the
world knows should pen a description of this scene, and that the same
should be given us to read. We should find it wanting, and although we
may be comparatively illiterate, our imagination, quickened by living
long in the solitude, would be able to supply all the deficiencies in
this description, so long as we kept to our thoughts.”

“Say!” exclaimed Dave miserably; “what language is it, anyhow?”

Was there anything going on in another part of the ship?

The pleasant voice made me sleepy, despite my suspicions.

“I may say that my own temperament is artistically affected by,
firstly, such a coloured evening as this; secondly, by moonlight upon
the water; and thirdly, by music. How often have we watched the burning
pathway of the moon! How often have we longed to take our boat along
that road, which we have thought may lead to some unknown land of
happiness! You follow my meaning?”

MacCaskill was laughing behind his hand.

“Quite a priest!” muttered Dave admiringly.

“I kin understand a young feller a-settin’ out in the moon,” said the
steward ponderously. “Did it meself one time, when I was worryin’ ’bout
me little gal, though it only come to her marryin’ a feller wi’ a
tidier face than mine.”

The adventurer resumed his high-flown talk. What he said might be
nonsense, but it succeeded in producing the impression he desired, and
in bringing the majority of his listeners under his influence. Had
I not known the real identity of the speaker, his musical voice and
delightful manner would have captured me with the spell that held the
others.

I closed my ears and used my eyes. The first thing I noticed was that
Akshelah had gone fast asleep. My second discovery showed me that
the mate was standing behind me, his face perfectly vacant. Redpath
still talked, and his sentences became more elaborate. MacCaskill was
smoking heavily, his hat tilted over his eyes.

Suddenly an extraordinary impulse caused me to exclaim loudly:

“Who’s at the wheel?”

An ominous silence followed, during which I became conscious that my
voice had not been untouched with suspicion. Redpath stopped in the
middle of a parenthesis, and his head came round. I felt small and weak
when his eyes met mine.

Sandy woke up, and Lennie opened his mouth in indignation:

“You’re runnin’ this ship since when? What you want rattlin’ the father
when he’s preachin’? Ship’s all right, ain’t it?”

“The young man is excitable,” said Father Lacombe magnificently.

“The Icelander we took on at Gull’s at the wheel,” said Sandy,
addressing the captain. “I gave it up to him for a spell. He steers
good enough.”

MacCaskill shifted himself sharply, and I was sure the idea of
treachery entered his mind also.

I had not lived with Nature all my life without learning how to
interpret her moods. The silence had become unnatural; the throb of the
screw was intensely loud; the atmosphere was as motionless as a sheet
of glass; the water had become stagnant; a single mosquito hovered
overhead, and gave out a noise like a trumpet. My glance went to the
south, where trouble arises. A livid cloud, shaped like a snake,
ascended slowly from the water-line, its “tail” wriggling madly. It was
the time of my triumph, and I pointed with a warning cry.

The colours of the sunset settled into a uniform haze of a deep red so
intense as to be almost black.

Lennie was up in an instant.

“Dave!” he shouted, his voice pealing fearfully into the hollow
silence, “slow her down.” He turned to Sandy. “I’ll take the wheel.”

Only a minute back we had been in daylight, but already gloom had begun
to settle, and the air was full of insects.

“A bad night to follow,” said Redpath resignedly. It was the night he
had looked for. “There will be neither moon nor stars to cheer us on
our way.”

A crash sounded from the wheel-house, the smash of shivered glass,
the thud of a weighty body upon deck, an awful commotion in the
overwhelming silence, and the ship swerved off her course like a tired
horse.

Lennie ran forward, and almost collided with Olaffson, whose white
face looked horrid in the gloom. He carried a big stone, shapeless and
water-marked.

“Fell from heaven!” he gasped, “outer the clouds, an’ near fixed me.
Fell right inter the compass and smashed it up.”

The adventurer put out his long hands and took the stone.

“A meteorite,” he said slowly. “Such accidents have occurred before.”

He turned, and heaved the fragment overboard. I had seen plenty like it
upon the beach at Gull.

Lennie was shivering with superstition as he spun the wheel round.

“Stone from heaven above beats all,” he muttered. Then he called:
“Sandy, bring the spare compass outer my cabin! Get a move on.”

The mate went, and was soon back. The compass was not to be found.

Lennie swore desperately, resigned his charge of the wheel, and
searched himself, but with the same result.

“You must have mislaid it, captain,” suggested Sandy, while the great
silence before the wind was heavy upon us.

Then Father Lacombe stepped forward, and extended a small, toy-like
thing with his unfailing courtesy.

“I have here, captain, a little compass, which I carry to guide me in
my journeys through the forest,” he said, anxious for the safety of the
ship. “If it will be of any service to you in determining your course,
consider it entirely at your service.”




SEEKWAH, WHO BLOWS GOOD TO NO ONE


A murmur passed through the air, and the last tinge of red light
succumbed to the hot haze, while the dry storm raced up, and the cloud
came well away from the water, whirling more slowly because its bulk
had increased.

I was superstitious enough to feel afraid when Akshelah, her face pale
and small with fear, assured me that a priest was one who controlled
the occult sciences, and that Redpath had undoubtedly obtained the
power by the mere assuming of the character. All evil comes from the
south, according to native belief. It is the south wind, Seekwah, who
blows good to no one.

“Rupe, I’m going around the ship,” said MacCaskill hastily.

He went one way, and I the other.

Approaching the stern hatchway, the figure I feared rose suddenly, and
there was no avoiding the black-clad man, who greeted me affectionately.

“My dear fellow, we are doing excellently. You were admiring my scheme
and my scholarship, were you not? Very neat, eh? Altogether beyond
those fools, whom we could have held there half the night. You timed
your interruption capitally. By Gad! we are working well together.”

My courage came up in arms.

“You’re not going to keep me here now,” I said defiantly.

He moved from the hatchway, all smiles and good humour.

“Good man, you set me a splendid example of keenness! Ah, you have
youth and energy to back you! I shan’t ask your plan, because I feel
convinced we can best attain our end by acting independently. We
understand each other. Keep a sharp look-out below, old man. They are
a rascally lot, and accidents easily happen during a storm. See you
presently.”

What was the use of me thinking I could fight this man!

I watched him move away, and was about to descend when a cold pressure
came across my face. The water, which had spread away like oil, broke
at the same moment into a shiver; the surface ruffled, as though rain
were falling. This disturbance was quickly gone, and the stagnation and
heat continued, but I knew, by this premonitory breath, that the wind
was very near to us.

The lanterns had not yet been lighted below, but a dull gleam suffused
from the engine-room, where I could hear the cord-wood dragged up to
feed the furnace. The blue light of a sulphur match flickered, and
when I came to a standstill a gaunt head popped over the barrels, and a
coarse voice called guardedly:

“Is it O. K., Bill?”

“Yaw,” replied the voice behind the blue light still spluttering. “The
priest’s gone. Gimme some smoke tobaccer.”

Just as I reached the two men the big shape of MacCaskill loomed upon
us. Leblanc shifted, but not in my direction. Morrison smoked on
imperturbably.

“Got a picnic here?” snorted the factor. “Say!” he called to the
half-breed, who turned unwillingly, “I’ve ben wantin’ to chew the rag
with you. You mind being this part wi’ old man Fagge one time?”

It was dark, but when Jim Morrison drew at his pipe I could see, by
the glow shed from the bowl, the white terror upon the face of the
half-breed. He had shown that fear before.

“Never was jest this part,” he said hoarsely.

“You come along the coast, I guess? Now, see here. Jim Petrie never
fixed old man Fagge?”

Leblanc gave a faint growl, and I could make out he was shaking his
great head.

“We know old man never died natural,” went on the cunning factor.

“Talk to ’em, pard!” exclaimed the gruff voice of Morrison. “They
ain’t a-gettin’ no rope around your neck.”

“Jim Petrie was around,” growled Leblanc. “An’ Redpath an’ Olaffson,
they were around.”

“Maybe Redpath could tell?” suggested MacCaskill.

“If he was here, which he ain’t.”

A hissing filled my ears, and for one moment I thought steam was being
released from the engine.

“He’s not so far off, I guess?” said MacCaskill.

Leblanc looked excited, and Morrison interested. They had the look of
men who expected to obtain some long-desired information. Both were
about to ask a question, when I staggered, fell against my partner,
cannoned him over, and the two sailors fell over us, while my ears were
filled with noise; the ship creaked dismally, lurched irresolutely, and
finally righting herself, settled into the wind and rushed with it.
The south wind had broken loose. In that hollow space the noise was so
terrific that shouting was ineffectual.

We disentangled ourselves, and crawled away.

The _Carillon_ gave me the idea that she was flying up and down a
succession of hills. On regaining the deck it was difficult to stand;
the wind streamed down, not in heavy blasts, but with one unvarying
torrent. The surrounding haze was as dry as a blanket. The current
brought strangely to me the voices of invisible men.

“Look at yon cloud in the south! Watch it!” This was Sandy’s voice.

Through the overhanging screen I could just see the purple bank
threatening from the black line of the horizon. Occasional ghastly
patches of foam swept along; lake, sky, and atmosphere were mixed, and
whirled together; the _Carillon_ plunged and panted through the gloom
to the infernal music of the mighty whistling.

Sandy’s voice reached me again: “No electricity yet.”

I could imagine Lennie struggling with the wheel, and the mate holding
Redpath’s tiny compass up to his eyes. The haze pressed upon us, like
the roof of a cave. To the side I could watch the livid water heaving
and roaring against an almost black wall of its rival element. Akshelah
found me out, and clung to me, the terror of her racial superstitions
upon her.

“We shall go down into the water, and it will choke us!” she screamed.

I had only known my own little river of Yellow Sands, always gentle
and pleasant. I had seen Lake Whispering under a storm, but I had
never known what it was to fight the violence of its waves. Water now
appeared to me for the first time as a power, as a tyrant capable of
destroying life with one stunning blow of its wave. It was the same
as the sand upon the beach. Lying idly, I could gather a handful, and
let it trickle through my fingers in its fascinating way, and it
would leave my hand as lightly as so much water. But when the gales of
Tukwaukin came, that fine yellow dust would leap into the wind in a
rage, and then I could not face it, because it would choke, and sting,
and blind. The Indian belief in a mighty beast, whom the Creator cannot
destroy, which spreads along the bottom of the lake, all eyes and
jaw, waiting to snatch and devour the men whom the water overwhelms,
recurred to my memory.

A deeper sound broke crashing behind the screaming of the dry tempest,
and a sheet of fire sprang suddenly into the south.

“We are safe,” said Akshelah gravely. “See! The Great Spirit is there.
They say he is everywhere, and though he has no power upon the water,
he sits upon the rock lighting his pipe, to show us he is there.”

The first torrent of wind had passed, and the stream became far less
violent. When the _Carillon_ came up from an abyss, as though she had
been hurled by a mighty hand, I saw a low island, chiefly of basalt,
where a few pines grew and some sparse vegetation. Akshelah pointed at
the land when we came up the second time. The lightning played about
the pines, making the scene as distinct as an evil dream.

Akshelah had her lips against my ear.

“Tell me what they do with the thing which was broken by the flying
stone?”

“They find which way the ship must go.”

“Which way do we go to reach the river?”

“North-east.”

“Then we have lost our way.”

I pulled her more closely to me, to make sure of her words, and called
on her to explain.

“We are going where the ghost-lights are born.”

Due north!

I asked how she knew.

“By the tree-moss on the island,” said she, and I was silenced.

This peculiar moss is an unfailing guide to the traveller, because it
will only grow upon the north side of trees. Akshelah’s wonderful eyes
had caught the information as we swept past the ghostly island.

Redpath had destroyed the compasses, and Lennie was steering the ship
by the inaccurate instrument the adventurer had provided. We were off
our course, and Redpath was having us borne to his own destination.

I told Akshelah to stay while I went in search of MacCaskill, but
she disobeyed me as usual. We fought our way along, bending before
the wind, but the deck was clear. I came to the wheel-house, and
clung to it to keep myself perpendicular. Within I saw two frightened
faces--Lennie clinging to the wheel, his coat off, his muscles
swelling, his black eyes staring from a perfectly pallid countenance;
Sandy struggling with one hand to control a smoked lantern, with the
other to hold the lying compass, so that the captain might see it. Both
men were more terrified than suspicious.

I was so injudicious as to yell a suggestion that the storm had carried
us out of our course.

Lennie never put his eyes on me. I swung myself round to the mate’s
side, and the little man shouted:

“See the island?”

I answered in the affirmative, and horror came into his eyes.

“It weren’t real. We’re right on our course, an’ there’s never an
island there.”

I saw Lennie’s lips moving, and I knew he was still cursing.

“Where’s the priest?” shouted Sandy.

I was as anxious to know as he was.

Sandy yelled on:

“I don’t believe in ’em, but I’d like him handy now. If we’re a-goin’
to drown, I’d like to be drownded close beside him.”

Lennie threw himself upon the wheel, and when it was steady, tugged at
the cord communicating with the engineer. By his doing so it occurred
to me that our speed was excessive, despite the wind. The engines did
not respond to the order.

A great shout came from Sandy, and the glass of his lantern shivered
against the wheel. He put out his hand, and the captain’s face went
ghastly, and his eyes half closed with a shudder.

To the left of us, bathed in floods of electric light, I saw a ragged
outline of rocks, with black trees battling above, and a great bed of
snow-white surf raging beneath.

“Petrie,” wailed the mate, out of that tumult, “we’ll meet maybe in
another world, though I hold to me doubts. Get below anyhow, an’ chain
up Dave and Pete afore they get any crazier.”

I went for the hatchway, and dived down, Akshelah always following.
Where was MacCaskill?

The darkness swallowed me. The lanterns had never been lighted. As I
set foot below, there came to me out of the darkness, and the blended
noises of storm and machinery, furious laughter as of men revelling.

“Muchumeneto is here to-night,” said Akshelah, and the girl was right.
The Evil Spirit was indeed aboard.

The gong in the engine-room pealed incessantly, but the engineer took
no heed. A dark figure controlled the life of the ship, and a long
white hand held the lever at full pressure. Pete was not there, Dave
was not there. Redpath was engineer, and Olaffson was his fireman!




CAPTAIN CORN WHISKY


Olaffson looked up and grinned contentedly; Redpath glanced at me
sideways. Before him the furnace whirled in white vapour, and the
tamarac logs heaved and melted like fat. At the first inward step I saw
a human shape pushed away in the corner, and this unconscious figure
suggested the chief engineer, his arms and legs secured by wide straps.

Redpath was peering at the indicator as I came in, and reducing the
pressure. Then he walked out of the blast of heat, unfastened and
pulled off his cassock, removed the hard hat and false hair, and stood
up before us by the gleam of the furnace as the English gentleman he
professed to be. I thought the Icelander would have fallen in sheer
amazement. The adventurer’s gentle voice became audible, but its tone
no longer suggested friendliness when he addressed me.

“I have told you the truth. He thought I was the priest, and as such
has been serving me. I have played the game by myself--always the
safest way. You see I have done very well.”

“Where is MacCaskill?” I shouted.

Redpath stroked his flabby chin very gently, his eyes upon me all the
time. I was ashamed to show fear, but I hesitated, even when Akshelah
pushed me slightly forward. Without raising his voice, the masterful
man made his words perfectly distinct.

“We shall reach shore before morning, I hope. For our mutual
convenience, I shall then recommend a parting, as I find we have not
so many sympathies in common as I had supposed. I shall proceed to
discover Bonanza. You will travel back to your aboriginal home. My
advice is sometimes worth following.”

His large face never moved; the cold words seemed as though spoken out
of a mask. I could merely repeat my question:

“Where’s MacCaskill?”

Again he ignored the question, but he smiled when he said:

“The men, I understand, are enjoying themselves. They appear to have
organised a small conversazione, or something of a very similar nature.”

A shiver ran along the ship, as a slight resistance met her speed, and
she raced on again.

“Sand or gravel?” called Redpath coldly, and Olaffson sulkily called
back, “Sand!”

The wind had been dropping all the time, and now singing and hoarse
laughter sounded above all the noises of the ship, warning me that I
was neglecting my duty and my partner. Redpath went back to the engine.

“I cannot imagine that you propose to resist my plans,” he said, in the
superior cynical style; and, as I left, he called after me, “Excuse me
for troubling you, but if you should meet the second engineer, will you
be good enough to ask him where he keeps the oil-can?”

The smoke-room of the men was placed well up in the stem. The bounding
and plunging became shorter as we worked along, dodging the rolling
barrels, until a lantern swung from a rafter overhead, and I pulled
Akshelah back so that I might command a view of the cabin, where the
oaths and jests became continually louder. The ship might have been
freighted with wild beasts.

I saw MacCaskill sitting between a couple of inebriated human parrots;
he was diplomatically taking his share in the conversation, and
although practically a prisoner, inasmuch as he was detained against
his wish, no harm would be likely to befal him so long as he made
no attempt to escape. The men were in the mood to be aggressively
friendly with anyone who would agree with them, and would be just as
ill-disposed should their inclinations be crossed. My hopes began to
run very low. The command had been taken out of Lennie’s hands. The
master of the _Carillon_ that night was Captain Corn Whisky.

Who but Redpath would have worked such a beastly plan into effect? He
had methodically smuggled the forbidden stuff on board, had kept it
hidden, and had distributed it among these hopeless lake drunkards at
what was for him the favourable hour of the electric storm.

Some scud raced across the sky, and between the rack and the lightning
came the smoky gleam of the aurora; the wind was so dry as to be
stifling when I met it upon deck; the haze was rolling up, and the
light increasing.

Lennie stood over the wheel, tired and silent. Sandy advanced
cautiously, and said when we met:

“I was jest a-comin’ down meself. They’ve got her a-goin’ pretty good
now, but while ago she was racin’ full rip. Captain’s mad enough to
kill. You felt that sand bar, eh?”

“Come over here,” I said, wishing to take him from the dark-looking
captain; and the mate looked at me quickly, and came.

We stood over the hatchway, and I told him to bend and listen. He
inclined his ear, his face towards me, and soon I saw a change working
in his features. I expected him to act instantly, but he had been
frightened before that night, and he was badly frightened now. He went
on staring at me, his face stupid.

“There’s only one thing what starts men inter that sort o’ noise.”

“Sandy,” I said--“captain, you, and I are sober, and Mac, who’s kept
below, and Redpath and Olaffson, who’re running this ship, and Pete,
whom they’ve knocked stupid.”

The little mate was grey under the quivering lights.

“Redpath! What? Who’s Redpath?”

“Father Lacombe, he called himself, and he’ll shoot as soon as look.”

Sandy moistened his lips.

“Lucky the storm’s passin’,” he half whispered. “I must tell captain,
though he won’t do good while he’s mad. I tell ye I don’t like it.”

There was no need to go for the captain. A hoarse shout came to us, and
that same moment the ship swerved mightily. There was no one at the
wheel; Lennie lurched over the deck, his hands feeling as though he
were blind, mastered by his fear and his superstition.

“We’re off our course--ben off hours!” he shouted, swaying about the
deck, and once I thought he meant to throw himself over. “How many
times have ye ben in these waters?” he yelled, swinging upon me as
though I had contradicted him. “What do ye know of this part, you liar?
Look at yonder, would you?”

“Let him work it off,” muttered Sandy.

Where the smoky mist was blown a little aside, I made out the grim
outline of the shore, with its trees, directly ahead.

“There’s no passage here!” raved the captain, hitting at me. “We shan’t
ever reach that land. This is shallow water--sand an’ rocks all the
way. I’ve seen ’em peepin’ outer the waves as black as Satan, an’ I’ve
pulled her off jest in time every half minute. We’ll strike a reef next
thing, an’ be playin’ of harps an’ wearin’ of crowns by morning--”

He was interrupted by a shrill cry from keen-eyed Akshelah. The haze
had broken behind, where she pointed wildly with both hands.

“Muchumeneto!” she screamed. “See him! He has been with us, and now he
follows. His dominion is upon the water. He watches us. Look! His eye!
his eye following us!”

Lennie staggered forward towards the stern, gazing blankly, both hands
above his eyes, and panting like a broken horse. I stared into the
lessening wind, between the ghost-lights and the gloom, where the
tossing dark-blue water came up, and simultaneously we saw the bright
eye--red, as if bloodshot--flash, and go out, and flash again as a
great wave surged up from the south.

The wind rushed, carrying along far north a weird sound, the voice of
that creature, while points of light, like fireflies, darted suddenly
into the distant veil of mist, and went out immediately, the creature
panting forth its fiery breath as it sweated in pursuit.

Sandy divested the monster of all supernatural attributes--another
steamer, undoubtedly the vessel which had come into Gull, too late, as
the mate now understood, to catch the _Carillon_. She was flying after
us along the line of the storm, knowing that wherever we passed it
would be safe for her to follow. The red eye went on flashing, and the
whistle chirped, as the mate expressed it; but we had no lights to show
that night, and our whistle would not chirp back.

“They’re crazy!” shouted Lennie, swinging back. “Same as us! Where’s
Pete?”

As he seemed more in a mood to take the information, Sandy gave it
carefully.

It seemed to daze the captain, but it had at least the effect of
bringing him to his senses.

“Where’s Dave?”

“Raddled!”

Lennie nodded, as though it were the answer he had expected, but his
face was full of vengeance.

“Pigs don’t feed alone,” he grimly suggested, stopped, and the mate
nodded.

The captain swore very quietly.

“What’s the man who works the racket?” he said; and now it was my turn
to answer.

He quickly cut me short.

“Get to the wheel, Sandy. Keep her off the rocks if ye can. I’m a-goin’
to stop her, or blow her up. Boy, fetch me up that bar!”

I lifted the iron bar used for stretching the ropes, and gave it to the
captain.

He made a hurried movement towards the hatchway, but before he could
begin to descend the hull crashed upon a reef, and we all went down
rolling. The ship lifted, groaned with the effort dragged herself
free, and leapt forward into deep water, game to the end, her pace
diminishing because of the shock and the ragged rent which the rocks
must have made along her.

Lennie picked himself up, took the bar, and again made for the
hatchway, but now with murder on his face.

“Best have a plan, captain!” I called, to conciliate him; and he looked
back, stopped, and joined me, possibly because he thought I was more of
a fighter than himself.




A MAN FOND OF LIFE


The stricken ship staggered on through unknown waters, doomed to become
a derelict.

Lennie’s madness had left him, now that the worst was known; indeed, it
was in quite a subdued manner that he said:

“They’re fightin’ below.”

An uproar that might have meant mutiny or the simple devilry of
drunkenness broke suddenly at the stem, and we reached the hatch in
time to drag MacCaskill upon deck out of the invisible hands of the men.

The language arising from the darkness was terrific and inhuman, and I
heard also the drunkards scrambling and struggling to make their feet
secure upon the steps.

“Keep ’em down!” shouted MacCaskill, as he began to mop his bleeding
head.

“How does she go, Mac?”

“Sinkin’, I guess.”

A head loomed up, and two huge brown hands felt for the opening.

I lifted my foot, and drove it down upon this head, and the sailor
went falling among his companions, who, unable to distinguish ally from
enemy, received him with resounding blows.

Sandy ran up with the covering of the hatch, a grin of triumph on his
face, and we clamped it down, while the men battered hopelessly.

“The stern passage is open yet,” panted the little man.

“Fasten it,” growled Lennie, in the same subdued manner. “We’ll keep
’em below, be Jerusalem! an’ drown the crowd.”

“There’s Pete!”

“He shouldn’t let hisself be took,” snarled Lennie.

The men were tumbling about, making through the darkness for the stern
hatchway.

Sandy and I raced them, but as we passed the hot funnel, where the
smoke came beating down, a large figure sauntered quietly along to meet
us, and the soft voice which I had grown to hate and fear observed:

“So the wind has altogether blown itself out. It was a short storm, and
a cheerful one.”

The mate stopped and stared, struck dumb.

I shouted at him to come on, lest the men should escape and complicate
matters, and he did so, breathing quickly; while the badly-built figure
strolled towards the bows, gently stroking his chin, as was his custom.

We jammed down the hatch in time, secured it by padlocks, and raced
back, sweating in the dry air.

Redpath was standing in the centre of the deck, his legs apart to
maintain his balance, one hand behind him, the other wandering over his
flabby face. He greeted our coming with his amiable smile.

“Capital idea,” he said. “I was just remarking to Captain Lennie--a
capital idea! Your little plan, Petrie, I’ll wager. It is quite
necessary for our safety that the men should be fastened between decks.
In fact, I came up to suggest it.”

I awaited the outburst from Lennie, but only silence followed. There
was plenty of sound from the wind and the sea, from the poor ship
shivering under us, and from the drunkards fighting together like
trapped forest-cats, but not a word from the captain. Lennie’s face
looked small, and his figure dried up. He tried to stare Redpath in
the eyes, but failed. MacCaskill sat upon a skylight, a little spent
after his exertions, and from the manner in which his mouth twitched I
gathered he was trying to say something. Had Redpath been a man of our
own stamp, a man of our own “outside” land, we might have understood
him, and we should have certainly beaten him by mere numbers. His
superior manner and his calm cynicism frightened us; his powerful will
crushed ours; his well-turned sentences, with never an oath in them,
spoken so faultlessly, and his magnificent air, made it difficult for
any of us to oppose him either by word or deed. Had it been Olaffson,
Lennie would probably have gone mad, and given him what he deserved
with his iron bar. But Lennie stood mildly before Redpath like a
servant before a hard master.

I cannot imagine that Redpath would ever have shown that he was either
disconcerted or encouraged. When he tired of the silence which his
presence had imposed, he went on:

“It is my duty to report to you, Captain Lennie, that one of your
sailors, the half-breed, Leblanc, taken on by you at Gull, there
conceived the dastardly plan of capturing this ship, his fellows
aiding and abetting, and of sailing her, after the present company,
myself included, had been put ashore--marooned is the expression used
upon the salt seas, I believe--of sailing the _Carillon_, I repeat,
to a certain locality, where he believes gold is to be found. Before
putting away from Gull, he smuggled on board a quantity of liquor,
with which he intended to stimulate the courage of his men at the
critical moment. As you are aware, captain, these men cannot move far,
or indulge in the simplest mental process, without having recourse
to spirits. It was fortunate that I discovered Leblanc’s plot some
time back. I assumed the disguise of a priest, as I was determined to
frustrate this mutinous and piratical plan, and deceived not only the
sailors, but your far more acute selves. To my sorrow I found myself
outwitted, though I overcame the chief engineer when he was mad with
liquor, and have since done my best to run the ship into safety, until
the happening of the deplorable catastrophe which now threatens to sink
us. It was impossible to stop the ship, because the mechanism became
unworkable owing to an accident arising from my own ignorance.”

Redpath turned and fronted the factor.

“I have an apology to make to you, sir,” he went on. “By an unfortunate
and inexcusable error, I imagined that you were in league with the
mutineers.”

Redpath stopped as abruptly as he had commenced. He had spoken his
carefully-prepared sentences with the air of a man who has done much
good in his time, but who would scorn to seek after praise.

Akshelah pushed me aside impatiently, and stood out before us, small
and determined. A bright colour animated her face, and her eyes were
scornful.

“You stand and listen to him, and call yourselves men,” she said
angrily. “That man is a liar. He is laughing at you, because he knows
he is stronger than you all. You are cowards, but he is the greatest,
because he only dares to fight with his tongue.”

Then I saw Redpath’s face change, and a faint flush rose under his
loose skin. He gave one short laugh, and set his glance full upon the
girl; but his power did not help him there.

Akshelah stepped out firmly, and stopped when within reach, until I
went cold with dread lest he should put out his hand and suddenly shoot
her. But Akshelah had no such fear, because she understood the man.

“I will show them,” she said fiercely, showing her little teeth, this
strong young cat--“I will show them that you are not a man at all.”

She lifted her shapely brown hand, this Indian maid of mine, leant
gracefully forward, and punished the English gentleman in the manner I
have since seen described as boxing the ears. It was no light touch,
because she struck only once, and I have no doubt but that the man’s
cheek stung him.

Redpath made no motion of retaliation, but he laughed easily, took off
his hat to the girl, raised his big shoulders, and muttering something
about “mixing in savage company,” walked away, with an eye behind, and
leaned carelessly against the side to await the next turn of events.
Akshelah had beaten him before us all, had made a fool of him, as the
saying goes, and our nerve improved in consequence.

It was only when we set ourselves to think of action that we discovered
our helplessness. There was nothing to be done, except to wait and
drift until the land should stop us. Evidently the water was gaining
slowly. The pursuing steamer had slackened speed, perhaps because she
was sure of us, or perhaps, as Sandy suggested, she, too, had been
crippled.

Lennie, with all his spirit gone, mourned the loss of his ship and his
reputation. He was almost in tears, and I overheard him muttering to my
partner:

“Ben on the water all me time, an’ never made more’n a livin’. Never
lost any other boat, ’cept a steam-tug ten year ago, an’ she was
cranky. Now I’m gettin’ old, wi’ nothin’ saved. Never get ’nother job.
May as well go down wi’ the ole ship, an’ be bit by fishes.”

“Shake ’em off, Bob,” advised the factor. “Things ain’t so messed, if
ye come to watch. We ain’t a-going to sink. We’re a-going to run on
sand yonder, and the ole ship’ll be better than ever when they’ve fixed
a patch across her.”

A chill entered the wind, as the atmosphere shifted and the light
became stronger. Looking out, I beheld a fine sight. Across our bows
ran the land in a curving line, a bank of trees without a break, with
the water white below, and the aurora above. An island ran out to port;
here a narrow passage of smooth water led up to a broad silver beach.
Any idea of running the ship through this passage and beaching her upon
the sand was precluded by the sight of a shoal of rocks guarding the
entrance effectually against anything larger than a canoe.

The keel dragged once upon sand in passing, but there was not enough
to stop us. We passed so close to the rocks that I could see the green
slime dripping off the black jaws, and some great pines, hanging
forward at an angle that looked impossible, brushed upon the mast, and
rained bunches of spines and small cones upon deck.

The broken-down captain refused to make any effort; Sandy had taken the
wheel, and was doing his best to keep us off the visible dangers. When
I came up, he jerked his head back, with the question:

“How’s she comin’?”

Afar along the white haunt of shadows, I saw the ghostly object, riding
up and down, her single light twinkling, and a gust passed, bringing
the deep sound of her panting.

“She’s not gaining,” I said.

“I guess,” said the mate gravely--“I guess we’re the first steamer
what’s ever fooled over these waters, an’ she’s the second.”

“Where are we?” I asked, but the mate did not know. He gave his opinion
that we were coming to territory never before visited by white men.

When I looked upon the silent shape of Redpath, I doubted the
statement. Probably three men on board were visiting this mysterious
region not for the first time, and my dead father had probably been
here, with the old man, Joe Fagge, the gold-finder.

“She’s slowin’ all the time,” said the mate, with dreary triumph.
“Maybe the fire’s gone out. Say! Listen below.”

Shouting and blasphemy had turned into yells of terror, and the
battering upon the hatches became furious.

“The water’s worryin’ ’em,” muttered Sandy.

Then Redpath considered it his turn to play. A change had certainly
come over the strong-minded man; he was frightened, and he could not
altogether hide it; his hands worked uneasily, and he continually cast
side glances towards me, as I thought, but I came to realise that I was
standing on the line between his eye and the pursuing steamer. It was
astonishing that he had not noticed her before.

“Captain Lennie,” he said loudly, “I appeal to you, in the cause of
humanity, to unfasten the hatches.”

Lennie made no sign of hearing, but MacCaskill said gruffly:

“You was wantin’ ’em closed down yourself not such a while ago.”

“I considered the men might be dangerous,” said Redpath. “Now they are
too frightened to do us any harm.”

“There’s Pete below,” muttered Lennie remorsefully. “Pete was allus a
good pard.”

“And I guess you took him foul,” exclaimed MacCaskill boldly. “I guess
you knocked him down, and then came up to tell captain he’s drunk.”

“As a gentleman, it is impossible for me to reply,” said Redpath.

“You give the boys that liquor, you and Olaffson,” went on the factor.
“You set ’em around me, and started ’em to hustle me inter the cabin,
’cause you wanted me kept outer the racket.”

“Perhaps you believe these romantic charges?” suggested Redpath.

“I believe a pard,” muttered Lennie unhappily.

“You are the captain of this ship. I put myself in your hands. Release
the men, and charge me before them.”

“He’s got the men on his side,” I called, backing up my partner, yet
never daring to look towards my enemy.

I heard a soft, reproachful voice: “Petrie, I am surprised at you.”

Lennie stirred, and walked over to the stern hatch. Going upon his
knees, he shouted, and his voice stopped pandemonium at that end.

“Captain,” whined one of the miserables, “open up, for mercy! The
water’s a-runnin’ around, an’ ter’ble cold, an’ we’ll be drownded.”

“Where’s Dave?” shouted Lennie. “Tell him to back astern. Where’s Pete?”

“Some feller’s locked the door of the engine-room, and Pete’s tied up
inside, they say, captain. Dave’s raddled. The water’s a-comin’ in
dreadful.”

“Who gave ye the liquor?”

“Olaffson,” whined the voice.

“Revolting creature,” said Redpath.

“Most of us ain’t very drunk, captain.”

“Olaffson is, of course, Leblanc’s partner in this miserable
undertaking,” continued Redpath.

A sharp gust came suddenly, and silt again jarred the keel.

“Mind out!” yelled Sandy, and we looked ahead.

A luxuriant screen of vegetation spread above and around, blotting out
the light. As we entered the arch of gloom, a cold sensation thrilled
me, and this outwardly beautiful, but treacherous, shore asserted
its malignancy. A horrible odour enclosed us, and when we drifted
nearer the silent trees, and could distinguish hundreds of naked poles
springing out of a beach of putrid mud, the loathsome atmosphere became
so dense that it was horrible to draw breath.

In helplessness and silence we awaited the end. The _Carillon_ drove
fast into the mud, brought up among the trees, and there stayed, her
screw feebly beating up the half-liquid filth. A faint gleam of light,
just powerful enough to struggle through the dense roof of vegetation,
lit, after a ghastly manner, the straight unvarying tree-stems, none
greater in circumference than the _Carillon’s_ mast, the fearful
stagnant mud-flat, and the gigantic crab-spiders, like the nameless
things of a dreadful dream, scuttling on long bent legs noiselessly.

“It is the place where the devils dance,” said Akshelah, in horror.

The men between decks were being well punished for their intemperance.
Pitiful were the supplications that ascended.

“Stinkin’ mud! Oh! come-a-help!” yelled one voice which sounded
familiar.

“Lord-a-save! great awful bugs crawlin’ everlastingly.”

Then the little steamer danced over the black and white water, and
touched the outer edge of the utterly black shadow. They must have
seen us by the matches we kept striking to light our pipes, though the
tobacco tasted of decayed matter, and the flames burnt blue.

Redpath was well and completely beaten. Perfect and polished gentleman
to the end, he removed a clean white handkerchief from his mouth, and
said:

“Captain Lennie. My dear sir,” with added warmth, “I will throw myself
on your clemency, as a man grievously attacked by unjust suspicion. As
a passenger upon your ship, and as a man who has done all the little
possible for our common safety, I appeal to you to return good for
good, and side with me now.”

“Pshaw!” muttered MacCaskill, and Lennie nodded approval at the
factor’s exclamation.

A powerful voice rolled solemnly over the mud and water, and reached us
through the poisoned atmosphere:

“_Carillon!_”

Sandy, whose lungs were strongest, returned the hail.

“Have you a man name of Tankerville?”

The shout went back in the negative.

“Have you a man disguised as a priest?”

“Persecution follows me,” Redpath remarked indifferently. “Petrie, your
father was the better man, though I regret to say he was a murderer! I
fear, gentlemen, I must bid you all good-bye!”

“There’s a reward,” rolled the menacing voice out of the fetid air.

“That,” said Redpath, more solemnly than I had ever heard him
speak--“that is distinctly ironic. After looking for money all my life,
I become a base article of commerce in my old age.”

“He can’t escape anyhow,” muttered MacCaskill, with a grin of
satisfaction.

“Good-bye to you!” called Redpath, turning to make a gesture with his
white hand. At the side of the ship he paused, and gravely adjusted the
handkerchief round his mouth and nose.

A gasp of amazement and horror went up from the deck. The adventurer
had gone!

We rushed across, sickening, and saw him below. He sank out of sight
into the unutterable putrescence, dragged himself up, congealed with
living filth, struggled on, half swimming, half dragging his body
through the accumulated vegetable rot of centuries, pulling himself on
by the smooth trunks of the trees, until he had lost all resemblance
to any living thing, human or animal, and the great spider-like
things, with the red stalk eyes and long crooked legs, darted at him
noiselessly. Out of his heaving, reeking track ascended a miasma
sufficient to poison a population. The ghost-light played once more
faintly upon the unnatural object writhing itself away to liberty. Then
it was gone, hidden in the outer stench and darkness.

MacCaskill spat violently, and pressed a hand to his aching forehead.
Horror-struck, he muttered:

“That’s a man who’s wonderful fond of his life!”




IV

AN UNKNOWN LAND




WEIRD HOLLOW


The officers and crew of the _Carillon_, our three selves, with
Inspector Hanafin and men of the _Firefly_, made a landing into the
country of perpetual day.

It was severely cold, and rain fell, each drop stinging like ice, when
we came upon a beach of vivid white sand, everywhere strangely marked
with black fragments of petrified wood, which at a distance closely
resembled rocks. Some ragged bush spread away to the north, and to the
south dreary shallows, where large-leaved plants floated. Before us a
razor-back succession of sand-hills, overhung by a clammy mist, hid all
that was beyond.

“We must push along,” said Inspector Hanafin, gathering his fur-lined
cloak about his uniform. “This is a malarial fever coast. Keep the
mosquitos off as much as you can.”

The _Firefly_ was anchored in the natural harbour made by a long reef.

Upon landing from our boats, most of the men went down on their
stomachs, and sucked up the unwholesome water. They were surly after
their dissipation, and awed by the presence of the inspector and his
two troopers, who had pursued Redpath across so many leagues of land
and lake.

We had released the sailors directly the police had come aboard; and
when we had taken some provisions, MacCaskill and I loading ourselves
with our tools and our packs, we made haste to desert the poisonous
mud-flats.

While we were making our way towards the sand-hills I looked for
Olaffson, whom I had seen on the boat; but the Icelander had already
disappeared, and I guessed he would work his way along the shore to
satisfy himself that Redpath was dead. I made no comment, because I was
glad to be rid of him.

We were on our way to find a camping-place outside the miasma of the
shore. MacCaskill, who had been tramping beside Lennie, joined me, and
whispered:

“Rupe, this is the beach Redpath was makin’ for.”

I ought to have been surprised, but somehow I wasn’t. I was tired and
indifferent.

“All right,” I said wearily.

As we toiled up the loose sand, I saw the red tops of the willow
bush peeping out of the “smoke.” We came over, descended through the
curiously thick fog, and suddenly walked right out of it into a pure
and clear atmosphere and a much warmer temperature. Beyond the sun was
shining; below spread a large hollow, its carpet a startling green,
its slopes covered with a luxuriant vine, which crossed and tangled
confusedly. The shifting sand changed to firm ground, which produced
a tall, stiff grass, the stems of darkest green, the points hard and
sharp, and black as ebony. The slope we were on resembled the back of
an immense porcupine.

We had not gone far before the men began to curse.

“Poison-grass,” said the inspector carelessly, as well he might,
because his own legs were protected by riding-boots. “We shall soon be
away from it. Walk straight, men, and tread it down firmly.”

“The devil of a country!” muttered MacCaskill.

“I don’t hold wi’ the bugs,” complained Pete, who was fairly capable,
but still nervous after his knock-down. “I don’t worry over grass-bite,
I don’t; but I hate to watch these yer black bugs.”

Long narrow insects writhed everywhere between the grass stems; they
were so numerous that we could not walk without treading across one or
more, and they were pulpy and unpleasant to crush.

“Never mind the bugs,” said Hanafin, who, I learnt, was a genuine
specimen of an English gentleman. “See that speckled plant, hemlock?
Everything seems more or less poisonous upon this bit of British
territory. By Jove, look here!”

The ground fell away suddenly, and we arrived above a succession of
pools, joined one to another by belts of swamp, the latter decorated
by luxuriant white moss. The black water was absolutely stagnant and
unreflecting; large bubbles rose continually, to burst, upon reaching
the surface, with a perfectly audible report. Stranger than these
bubbles were numerous solid-looking globes--a few opal-white, the
majority a very dark blue, others a dirty grey, all curiously marked
with shifting designs of every imaginable colour, though the blue
tint always predominated. These globes bounded over the pools without
marking the surface with the smallest ripple, just like rubber balls
bounding over the ground. Immediately a jumping globe touched the moss
it vanished; if it safely negotiated the morass, it bounded hilariously
over the next pool; if it fell short in its next jump, it invariably
paid the penalty of failure by becoming extinct.

“The hell of a country!” muttered MacCaskill.

“Not at all,” said Hanafin, who knew everything. “Nature discovered in
her own laboratory. We are near the magnetic circle, and I suspect two
of the earth’s currents meet at this hollow. Dip your hand into that
pool,” he said, turning to me.

“Do not,” said Akshelah.

I did not like the look of the thick, unmoving water. The inspector
drew aside his cloak, passed down before me, and dipped in his own
hand. I saw his shoulders lift, and his arm jerked back, before he
drew up smilingly, letting loose a long breath.

“This water ought to cure the sickest man on earth,” he said.

Curiosity tempted me, so I slid down and cautiously inserted my
fingers. The water was glutinous and tepid, but nothing happened. The
inspector looked at me with a faint smile.

“Keep your hand in, but come off the rock.”

I stepped off, and, when my feet touched the wet moss a strong shock
thrilled through my system, forcing back my arm, and passed in and out
of my body and across my shoulders, making me tingle all over.

“An electric pool,” said Hanafin, when I gave a gasp of relief to find
that the water showed no inclination to imprison my hand. “To-night the
little globes will resemble so many arc-lights, and the black pools
will be like mirrors with the sun upon them.”

Coming down into the hollow, towards the fringe of bush where we
intended to make our camp, we became stopped by a ridge of blood-red
rock, which rose abruptly like a wall. We thought nothing of the
obstacle, until we made the discovery that the barrier was not rock,
but a kind of slimy clay, which melted in the warmth of the hand, and
left the fingers stained scarlet. MacCaskill muttered yet another
reference concerning the country, while Lennie, who was utterly played
out, suggested camping where we were.

“When you can’t face your enemy, find a way round,” said the inspector.
“Norman, go and explore.”

The trooper swung round, astounding me by his ready obedience. He was
soon back to report that he had found the way round.

We reached the edge of the bush, made a clearing and a fire, and spread
open our packs.

The inspector selected the best-sheltered spot, called, “Norman, wake
me when breakfast is ready,” rolled up his fur-lined cloak for a
pillow, spread a silk handkerchief over his face, and went to sleep.

Lennie and the inspector intended to return to the pestilential shore
to drag the _Carillon_, if possible, off the poisonous mud-flat. The
ship was owned jointly by the Northern Fishing, the Outside Limit
Lumber, and the Hudson Bay Companies--all wealthy corporations.

Later on, I ventured to ask Hanafin what Redpath had done to deserve
the vengeance of the law, but the inspector only looked at me smilingly
over his cigarette, and propounded a question of his own:

“I suppose not even a young and agile man could hope to escape out of
that quagmire?”

I expressed my doubts, and the soldier-policeman went on:

“In that case, we won’t discuss the man or his doings. We have a theory
that it is ungenerous to speak evil of the dead, who can’t hear, and
who don’t care. If the same sentiment were extended to the living, who
can hear, and who generally do care, there would be less work for my
profession.”

However, MacCaskill spoke differently.

“He ain’t dead, Rupe. Folks like him never do die. Anyhow, when you
make dead sure such a one’s snuffed out, he always comes up again. If
Redpath had got to work, and run off into clean bush, maybe he’d have
fell some place, and bruke a leg, and starved, just ’cause no one would
have ever looked for it. It don’t look possible for him to escape outer
that mud before he chokes, and that’s just the reason why I look for
him to turn up again. Now, where’s that little skunk of an Olaffson?”

“Gone to find Redpath,” I said; but MacCaskill laughed.

“He don’t give a darn about Redpath. He’s gone inland, in the direction
we oughter be a-going now.”

“He doesn’t know the way.”

“Redpath told him, likely. If he ain’t, Olaffson will smell it out for
himself. Say! You and me must get a move to-night, and slip away quiet
when the boys are asleep.”

We had supper at the usual hour of six, and afterwards gathered round
the fire, to smoke and talk before sleep.

Inspector Hanafin warned us to prepare for a local thunderstorm, with
other electric manifestations in the hollow; but Sandy, who held
himself weather-wise, asserted that the “night” would be clear. Said
the inspector:

“You forget that this hollow is apparently directly influenced by the
magnetic North Pole. The magnetic change occurs once every twenty-four
hours, as a result of the free electric currents in the atmosphere
above, and so, directly the aurora rises, we shall have some kind of an
electric display. Wait until the sun pretends to set.”

The sun left us about one hour before midnight, and straightway the
trouble began. There was, of course, no darkness, yet the ghastly
effulgence down the hollow could not have been mistaken for honest
light; the atmosphere became frequently flooded by a curious radiance,
grading from the palest to the darkest shade of blue, sometimes
cross-hatched by shadows, which I could not help thinking had no
natural right to be present. The bush behind our camp was “naked,” that
is to say, the foliage was all overhead; there was no undergrowth;
the bare slim boles supporting the fungus-like masses made the bluff
resemble a cave filled with stalactites; a lambent light quivered and
played away into the distance, running softly about this nakedness,
changing its direction, intensity, and tint many times in a minute,
while a series of diminutive explosions cracked here and there above.
The vines spread along the open side, and the long runners now appeared
to be rising and falling, like the surface of the lake when ruffled by
wind. A vibration passed periodically through the ground. When I stood
up I could sometimes see the arc-globes, whenever they jumped higher
than usual, in their mad, irresponsible dance over the pools.

The men were as frightened as they could be, and one of Hanafin’s
troopers expressed his opinion that the mouth of the pit lay in the
immediate neighbourhood. What he meant I could not tell; but Akshelah
assured us that the Evil Spirit always chose such a spot to disport
himself in with his associates. We should be safe, she said, so long
as we kept away from the water, and if we sought shelter upon rock,
directly we saw any unnatural shape. There were rocks hard by.

These rocks were of pure silica, and as it had been observed that
the factor and myself carried mining implements, Lennie linked the
circumstances, and questioned my partner. MacCaskill confessed that
he had tired of an unremunerative employment, and decided to make a
prospecting trip, “the boy spoilin’ to get away after the ole man
hopped.” He would not own that we knew anything, but while he talked
I made the discovery that Leblanc and Morrison had broken themselves
from the circle, and were listening as closely as they dared. I caught
also the inspector’s keen eyes fixed upon me, and I had the sense to
know that the clever Englishman was forming his own deductions from my
partner’s speech and my manner. But he asked no question.

“I always wonderful well wanted to look for the dirt,” admitted Lennie;
“but minin’ luck’s too queer, an’ a man gen’rally quits poorer than
he started. I used to read that Garden of Eden mines chapter outer me
Bible when I was a younker--read it hundreds of times, I guess I did.
Used to make me mouth run to read all about the gold and the diamonds
a-lying around Eden; an’ I guess Adam just loafed around sorter
careless, an’ let all the stuff lie.”

“Bet you Eve didn’t,” said the factor, having his own ideas concerning
women. “She’d pick up a chunk o’ yaller, and set it against her arm,
and hello to Adam, ‘Say! how’s that?’--”

He was knocked off by a mighty explosion. The air became dense and very
hot, and permeated by a sour odour, while an intense blue light glared
strongly out of the bluff, and made every face ghastly. Our camp fire
blazed up as though a blast of wind acted under it. For a minute all
was shouting and confusion.

“I’d just as soon be on the _Carillon_,” said Lennie. “I’m out of this.”

The cold-blooded inspector laughed. The light thrilled again, a darker
blue. Hardly had it gone when Pete, whom we considered stupid after his
late ill-treatment, wiped his mouth and exclaimed:

“Captain, there’s a ter’ble nasty sorter black beast on yon tree
a-watchin’ of us.”

We looked, in the spirit of unbelief, and I suppose we all saw a
dark object, something a little thicker and blacker than the shadows
surrounding it, slide noiselessly down the smooth tree. I know we
rushed at once for the rocks, and I confess that I was one of the first
to reach the shelter which Akshelah believed to be infallible. It says
a good deal for our credulity when I say that in less than a minute we
were all clambering over the quartz, the men who could not obtain a
first footing literally blubbering with fear, all except Hanafin, who
never shifted a muscle, and his troopers, who were forbidden by their
discipline to leave the officer. The shapeless black object lay at the
bottom of the tree like a heap of mud.

“Say!” muttered one of the men; “think it’s _him_?”

“Course it is, you fool,” answered the chorus.

Hanafin got up, the lights flickering around him, and a warning cry
was issued by the choir upon the rocks. The figure stirred, and hopped
queerly over the ground, stopping by the fire, and there warmed itself.
Hanafin held out a biscuit; the creature grabbed furiously, and
finished it with gulps like a dog.

The inspector spoke, but received no reply.

“I saw it a-settin’ up above quite a time,” said Pete unhappily. “It
was a-settin’ lonesome, a-lickin’ its paws an’ watchin’. ’Tis one o’
they pesky things what looks for men sleepin’ out, an’ sucks ’em dry.”

It was not easy to tell the creature’s exact size, because it remained
bent, and its face and body were thickly covered with hair. When
Hanafin called again the creature yapped, and put out a hand for more
food. The inspector complied with the demand, then turned to us with
the grave assurance that the visitor had once been a fellow-man.

“Lost, gone crazy, and become a beast,” he said.

Nobody believed him, and Akshelah scoffed openly when asked if she knew
what he was.

At that time, while surrounded by all the strange sights of that weird
hollow, I was convinced with the others that the supernatural was
enjoying full sway, and that what then occurred to us was entirely
due to the mysterious appearance of the hairy, speechless being. A
description may sound grotesque, but to me at the time it was more a
thing to shudder at than laugh over.

A thunderstorm had been in operation for some time, the lightning
being apparently flung just over the trees out of the low clouds which
separated the hollow from the outer country. The thunder took the
form of constant explosions, entirely different from the customary
long-drawn-out rumbles and echoes. In addition to this intensely local
storm, erratic sheets of light constantly flooded the bush, and the
peculiar sour odour never failed to follow.

An unusually brilliant blue current thrilled, just as Hanafin walked
round the fire to interview the monkey-like monster. Instantly the
inspector vanished, and with him the entire camp. The fire, the
bluff, the ground, everything was wiped out, even the rock we stood
on; we might have been suspended on the edge of a precipice, peering
hopelessly into a thick sea fog; the world seemed to have floated away
from us, leaving us standing erect in space.

Whether the other men had any sensation beyond fright, I cannot say;
but for my own part I felt mightily exhilarated, and with the elation
of the sudden strength that thrilled into my body, as scores of minute
blue sparks broke from our persons, I had a mad desire to relieve my
energies by snatching up each one of my companions--Akshelah, who held
to me, excepted--and hurling them one by one into the apparent abyss.

What would have happened had I attempted to do so is again impossible
to say, because the gulf which had been so remarkably fixed about us,
which entirely divided us from the planet our world, which blinded and
deafened us, and made us helpless castaways upon the invisible rock,
was purely magnetic. Backward we could move, but not an inch forward.
There did not appear to be any particular resistance; it was not
at all like trying to force a solid body; we were simply unable to
move. The magnetic barrier was non-conducting; sound would not travel
through it any more than eyesight. For all the assistance we could
have rendered Inspector Hanafin, and for all our knowledge of what was
happening on the other side of the current, we might have been placed
respectively at the opposite poles of the earth.

The resisting fluid swept away with all the suddenness of its coming;
and at the withdrawal of the magnetic force, the men scurried away from
the rocks like so many jack-rabbits worried by a dog.

MacCaskill whispered to me hurriedly, and as we both preferred to face
the chance of fever on the shore, rather than the unknown powers of
natural forces, we made straight for our tools and packs, caught them
up and ran, Akshelah leading our flight, away up the slope from the
lights and explosions of the hollow, through the vines that caught at
our legs and arms, and thrilled us like so many electric wires; past
the pools that were black no longer, but living and dazzling, and where
the gleaming balls were leaping excitedly; through the poison-grass,
quivering and stiff in the electric air, and emitting bright sparks
when touched by our hurrying legs; over the sand-dunes, and so out
under the aurora, where the wind moaned out of the lake, and brought
the foul odour of malaria through the “night.”

We looked down from the summit of the sand-hills, and, as in the early
morning, the hollow was concealed by its roof of cloud, which spread
beneath our feet like a smoky floor. We could make a good guess as to
what was taking place in the depths by the manner in which the clouds
were continually bathed in blue light, by the distant, but faintly
audible, explosions, and the sour odour arising, until we turned to
face the far more noisome miasma ascending from the beach of the great
Lake Peace.




MATERIAL GHOSTS


On the day following our flight from the hollow, MacCaskill and I awoke
with dry mouths, tormenting heads, and irritated bodies, the result
of camping within the influence of the coast. Had Akshelah not been
with us, we should have done no travelling that day. She collected
some plants, squeezed their feeble juices into a tin mug, and made us
swallow the abominable mixture. We were both violently sick, but at the
end of an hour the fever left us. The exercise of walking restored us
completely, though it was very possible that the healthy air, which met
our faces as we ascended, had much to do with the cure.

For five days we journeyed over the Bad Lands, and during the whole
of that time we did not sight a living thing, except insects in their
millions, some white-headed eagles and magpies, and a few loons over
the water, which was everywhere abundant. The country was heaped with
rocks, interspersed with bluffs of arctic pine, and spruce, scraggy and
stunted, the roots buried in thick tufts of the monotonous white moss.
Only a few plants, resembling bunches of yellow feather, sucked an
existence in sheltered niches; and a little bleached flowering grass,
as dry as the rock, wearied our eyes all that journey.

At the end of the fifth day we came to the summit of an endless ridge,
and looked down upon a gully, the sight of which made our hearts beat
faster, because, by my father’s plan, we believed that we were then
standing outside the door of Bonanza.

A narrow stream trickled among the rocks, and green banks of turf rose
on each side invitingly. Here the vegetation was far more luxuriant;
there were thickets of cranberry bush, hung with yellow and scarlet
fruit, with raspberries nearer the water. Akshelah caught some arctic
trout, strange-looking fish, having great fins like wings; we picked
berries by handfuls, and fared luxuriously. When we settled to rest
upon the cool, clean grass, I felt more content than at any time since
our landing at Gull.

We noticed one curious thing while walking along the gulley to the
camping-ground we had selected. We passed into a belt of cold wind,
blowing strongly across the gulley, just as in swimming one enters an
icy cold current of water. We escaped this wind almost directly, but
we had time to observe that no vegetation flourished where it crossed.
This wind cut a clean dry track across the coulee, and where it struck
the rocks it was gradually wearing a cave by the power of its blast.

It was chilly, and as we sat round our fire after supper this passage
of wind began to trouble me. I went on thinking, and presently
exclaimed involuntarily, because I never liked to show that I
cultivated an imagination:

“Is there anything in dreams?”

MacCaskill looked at me over his pipe, and I added:

“Can anyone dream of a place he has never seen?”

“Oh, no,” answered Akshelah. “When we sleep we see our people, who have
gone to the Great Spirit’s country. Our people do not speak to us; but
when they come they make signs, so that we may know that the season is
good for them, and that they are having plenty of hunting. The ghost of
the brave smokes the ghost of his pipe, but the man himself, and the
pipe itself, have been destroyed in the fire.”

MacCaskill was no deep thinker. He merely discharged a cloud of smoke,
grunted, and expressed his opinion that dreams were “no use anyhow.”

I saw before me two shining walls of rock, towering and shutting out
the light, and I shivered, because the wind, which was whistling past,
became very cold. I understood more than I could express, and when I
tried to think again, my mind stopped short at an improvised bed in
a cleft of the rock, a few bushes tossing just above, and the wind
always pouring, and rushing, and moaning.

“I guess we’re almost there,” I said abruptly, and the factor started,
looked at me curiously, and removed his pipe.

“I had a mind to say that.” He spoke more slowly than usual. “That
yonder should be the Canyon of the North Wind, and up there we should
strike Mosquito Pass. We’ll know to-morrow.”

Akshelah interposed. Without looking at us, she held out her arms
against the faintly blue sky, and called:

“You see the ridge where the sun-colours are resting? I saw a man stand
there, but while I looked he was gone. He is coming this way.”

We stood up and looked, straining our eyes along the defile, but could
see nothing, and MacCaskill was disposed to think the girl mistaken.

“It’s no use shifting,” he said. “He will have seen our fire.”

“He is coming slowly,” said Akshelah.

Again she pointed, and now we saw the dark object crawling down the
slope.

“See!” exclaimed the girl. “He is very weak.”

Directly the man entered the line of wind, the current swept him
off his legs. We did not go out to help him, because we could not
anticipate meeting a friend. Presently, the figure blundered up, and
we recognised the ugly face of Jim Morrison. As usual, his own demands
were uppermost.

“Gimme some grub; do ye now,” he whined, sinking upon the grass. “I’m
’most starved.”

“You have come through plenty of berries,” said Akshelah scornfully.

“And you can pick ’em for yourself,” added MacCaskill. “We ain’t
runnin’ a gen’ral store to fellers that start trackin’ us. Your pard
Leblanc with ye, I guess?”

The sailor blasphemously asserted that they had not followed, but had
escaped from the hollow after us, and had not dared to return, because
they feared punishment for their share of the work on the _Carillon_.

“All the boys have run,” declared Morrison, but we knew this was a lie.
“We did track ye jest a piece,” he confessed at last.

“Ye don’t track another piece,” said the factor. “Ye get back to your
pard, and sling yourselves out er this country before morning. We don’t
call for a couple of dogs sniffin’ after us.”

At first, when a hoarse cry came along the defile, a distant human
shout of undeniable fear, I suspected another plot; but Morrison, who
had been stripping a bush with both hands, and gulping down the fruit
in a beast-like manner, stopped and turned his head, blenching with
unmistakable terror.

“’Twas Gedeon!” he gasped.

He went on to explain that he had left the half-breed, who had broken
down with hunger and fever, upon the rocks on the far side of the
ridge. Akshelah busily dispersed and stamped out our fire, and
MacCaskill began to aid her, while I looked on stupidly, remembering
that I was seeing how men live.

“Maybe he saw something to fright him,” muttered the factor, but not
as though he believed in what he said; while Morrison forgot his own
demands, and began to whimper.

We determined to go to Leblanc’s assistance, more, I fancy, because we
were curious to discover what other force might be in the field, than
from any desire to save the half-breed, whom we knew had been in this
place twice before together with his master. We made a cache of our
tools and supplies beneath a bush, scattered the dying embers of our
fire, and began the ascent, passing on this occasion above the spot
where the wind struck. The night was perfectly calm, the light soft
and clear, although, it being well after midnight, a few shadows were
faintly marked under the rocks. That the half-breed was alive soon
became evident, because his shoutings and frightened appeals scarcely
ceased for a moment. Presently Morrison sang out, and Leblanc’s note
altered.

“Jim! Jim! I’ve ben hit wi’ a knife!”

Morrison was inclined to consider his own well-being, but we pushed him
ahead of us. Hard by a patch of strong-smelling bush we found Leblanc,
half in the light, half in the dim shadow, and writhing like a worm.
An examination showed us that the man had been stabbed in the fleshy
part of the shoulder; it was a very slight wound, the would-be murderer
having evidently aimed at the back of the neck, and been frustrated by
a sudden move.

“Who did it, pard?” Morrison called huskily, and backing away
uselessly. “Who come to hit yer?”

“The country’s chocked wi’ ghosts!” wailed Leblanc, his face ghastly.
“Old ghosts, an’ young ghosts, mostly old. One hit me dirty wi’ a knife
as I set right here. I never see him. He hit quick, an’ was away. He’d
have come to hit again if ye hadn’t scared him. Jim, I be bleedin’
dreadful!”

“Dirty coward!” muttered MacCaskill. “Ain’t nothing much worse’n a
mosquito prick. Do ye good, ole woman. Let the fever outer ye.”

“I be dyin’,” went on Leblanc, blubbering. “I ain’t got religion. Jim,
tell us if there’s a God.”

“There’s a God for decent folk. None for the like of you,” said the
factor. “Shake yourself up, and tell who hit ye.”

“I didn’t see nobody. I heard a move, an’ made to turn, when it come
right inter me shoulder all hot. A ghost it was, sure. They tell how
awful some of ’em do bite. I don’t know where I be a-goin’, not havin’
religion, an’ don’t know whater say. Oh, Jim, tell us whater say!”

I stepped out.

“Tell what happened to old Fagge the last time you were here,” I said.

This was the first occasion I had actually spoken to the half-breed
since the early morning at Gull, when I had mistaken him for the
Icelander. The wounded man went on writhing, and tried to drag himself
under cover by means of the long tufts of white grass.

“Is it a dyin’ confession, say?” he whined. “The last talk o’ me,
Gedeon Leblanc, what never had no luck?”

“I guess you ain’t long for this world,” said the factor grimly.

“Talk at ’em, pard,” piped Jim Morrison. “Tell ’em what ye know.”

“We know you come here twice with ole man Fagge,” continued MacCaskill,
smoothing the way for him. “We know you’ve been followin’ us. Well, I
guess there’s lots of gold for the crowd, and if you talk straight, and
don’t die quick, we won’t stop ye from stakin’ out your claim, after
we’ve done first choosin’.”

Morrison was staggered by such generosity, which removed the necessity
for much base plotting.

“Pard,” he exclaimed, “didn’t I talk to ye? Mister Petrie an’ Mister
Factor MacCaskill ain’t Redpath, what can’t a-bear to share. Didn’t I
talk to ye? Didn’t I? Gimme some eatin’ tobaccer,” he demanded, turning
to me, considering himself admitted into our society by my partner’s
concession.

Instead of the desired chew, he received a command to “quit his noise.”

Evidently the cowardly half-breed was in great fear of death.

“Mister Petrie,” he gasped, “your father never done it! No, sir. Ole
man Fagge is planted not so far off. He was knifed, mister, an’ I’m
the only man who knows who done it, ’cause I saw wi’ me own eyes. Yer
father was a-standin’ close up when ’twas done, but he never done it.”

“Who killed Joe Fagge?”

The name of Redpath was shivering on my tongue.

“Olaffson,” blurted out the half-breed.

The Icelander again! Always Olaffson! I could have believed that
Redpath had told me the truth, and that Olaffson was the originator of
all the plots I had attributed to him.

By still playing upon the half-breed’s fear of death, we obtained
the whole story. My father, Leblanc, and Fagge had passed into this
defile, and had reached the Canyon of the North Wind, whose existence
was at that time only known to us by the rushing breath below. The old
man prowled about by himself, permitting no one to accompany him, as
he would not give his secret away lightly, and in the course of his
ramblings came across Redpath, whom he hated, and who had incautiously
encamped just outside the canyon. Returning in a rage, the half-mad
miner swore that he would abandon the expedition, and refused to give
the key to the situation, which was the secret of the entrance into
Mosquito Pass, the only way leading out from the canyon to the unknown
land of Bonanza beyond. My father had seen the old man preparing a plan
to aid his already failing memory, and he had acquainted Redpath with
this fact.

One night--it was late in the season, and already some snow had
fallen--Olaffson came up to the camp fire, where Fagge was sitting
alone. My father was spreading his blanket under the shelter of the
rocks; Leblanc, still farther away, was cutting logs for the fire.
The Icelander flung himself suddenly upon the old man, stabbed him
when he resisted; but before he could escape with the secret my father
was upon him, and had knocked him down. Joe Fagge was dead. My father
took the plan, which he kept with him the rest of his life; Olaffson
picked himself up and went to report to Redpath, who came presently,
and accused my father of having murdered the old miner for his own
ends. They came to blows; my father had the best of matters there, and,
after beating his late friend, went away, taking the secret with him,
and Leblanc never saw him again. Redpath was left helpless, and when
he failed to find the pass had to follow my father south. He only just
escaped; had he remained another twenty-four hours, he would certainly
have been frozen in and killed by the arctic winter.

Such was the story Leblanc told us, and when he had done, it must be
owned that I spared a pitying thought for Redpath, who, according
to the statement we had just heard, had cause to believe my father
guilty. But had Olaffson attacked the old miner upon his own
initiative, or had Redpath instructed him to obtain that plan at
whatever cost?

Leblanc quickly reverted to his own condition.

“Be I a-goin’ to die soon, do ye think?” he went on whining. “I feel
ter’ble queer-like.”

“Speakin’ the truth might make ye feel that, I guess,” said the factor,
and with that we left the men, and made our way back to what had been
our camp.

The invisible hand, which had tried to settle Leblanc, had passed there
also, making a thorough sweep of our tools and our packs, even down to
our one little tin mug, which I remembered having thoughtlessly left in
the open.

I had never before seen MacCaskill in a thorough rage. His great body
quivered with passion, and he put out his hammer-like fist, which anger
caused him to move as though it had been a hammer.

“There’s no bit of mercy if we strike him. Golden gates o’ Jerusalem!
If I get him into me hands, I’ll smash him up like a rotten melon.”

Akshelah was not one to waste time in threats; indeed, I have noticed
that women always reserve their energies to meet a crisis. She was
already upon her knees, patting the ground, as though it had been a
rich fabric pleasant to the touch. Presently she stood up, and soon was
walking, picking up a track which to me was invisible.

“You are wrong,” she said, as we followed. “The Iceland-man has a small
foot. This is large.”

She tracked the footprints to the stream. We crossed by means of the
rocks; and when on the opposite side, Akshelah was puzzled.

“I know,” she said presently; “he took off his moccasins. See! Here he
put down the tools, and rested.”

We took her word for this, because not even my trained eyes could
pick out the signs she tried to indicate. She took us along, and soon
a deep, melodious sound came upon our ears, and the lights ahead
shimmered before the shadows stopped them, as the haze shimmers on a
hot day. We were near the mouth of the canyon, and soon we saw the
narrow black entry, the straight cleft where the rocks lifted up to the
clouds, with the torrent of wind booming forth. The air became moist,
colder, and there was the smell of vegetation rotting in water.

Just outside, Akshelah stopped to announce that the tracks of the man
who had robbed us went “up into the wind.”

It was the time of the shadow--the two hours after midnight when the
light is perplexing. The canyon was very dark, because the summits
almost touched far away overhead, horrifying, and very cold. We lost
nerve; we were tired after a long day’s journey; we resolved to defer
our entry into the north wind until the coming of the perfect day.




AN OLD CAMPAIGNER


I must have been dreaming, because I awoke with a cry upon my lips, and
I thought I had exclaimed “Father!”

On one side MacCaskill breathed heavily, shifting often, as the ground
chafed his bones through the white moss we had collected to lie upon;
on the other Akshelah slept, her head upon her two hands, a pretty
picture, and yet severe, for she might have been dead, so still was
she, and so pale. Her little face was unhappy, and my heart reproached
me, because I knew that she was enduring hardships for my sake. She
understood more about my own people than I did myself. She thought
that when I had found enough gold I should go away and find my own new
place, perhaps in the world of that visionary London, where I had first
seen the light, and she would see me no more. The unhappiness she would
not betray by day Nature brought and left upon her face in sleep. She
was young womanhood, I young manhood. If there was any gulf between us,
she could not see it. Why should I try to find it?

The voice in which I had called “Father!” was not my own. It was a thin
voice, peevish and frightened. “Take me away,” was my thought, before
I entirely awoke; “I don’t like the wind and the noise.” But I was a
grown man, abnormally strong, capable of protecting others. I could not
understand my dream.

Certainly there was a noise which was not the work of imagination. I
started up, wide awake; a few frogs whistled at the stream below--that
was a natural sound. The wind brought a steady, metallic ring--that was
not natural. It was the quick stroke of a mining tool upon rock. I rose
quietly, and walked to the black mouth of the canyon; but a footstep
followed, a hand touched me, and a voice spoke.

“Ah, you are going away!”

Akshelah had awoke after me, and had followed jealously.

“Don’t you hear that noise?” I whispered.

But the girl had no ears for it. She drew me away.

“See, he is sleeping, and will never know.”

“What do you mean, little squirrel?” I said, in the old foolish manner
I had spoken to her at home, and she responded to my mood.

“I will find the trail across the Bad Lands. I will bring you down to
the green country,” she whispered passionately. “We will go back to the
Yellow Sands before the winds of Tukwaukin come. Your tepee will be
ready. You can be happy there.”

“We will go together soon,” I said, wanting to make her happy, but not
wishing to deceive. “I cannot leave him. It would be cowardly.”

“He does not care for you. It is the yellow dirt out of the ground that
he loves. When he has plenty of that he will forget you, because when
men find the yellow dirt they want no other friend. They do not know
that the Bad Spirit makes the yellow dirt, and then hides it away in
the ground, and watches. You shall hear him laugh at nights when he
sees the men finding it.”

The ringing of metal upon the hard rock went on.

I could not conquer the impulse which bade me enter the dark canyon,
and Akshelah would never let me out of her sight. The struggle against
that wind put confidence into me, and I stepped out beside the cold,
dripping wall, as sure of my way as though I had been walking from
Yellow Sands up to my homestead. The ascent was very gradual.

Presently the loose rocks turned to shingle, hard to walk upon, but any
noise we made in advancing was carried down by the wind.

“Take care!” I cried warningly. “The wall juts out here.”

I could see nothing, and yet I had spoken the truth. At the right
moment I put out my hand and met the wet wall, and we went round, never
making a mistake.

“Presently there will be a break,” I went on. “Right ahead is a bluff
of spruce. It is always dark there, and damp, and full of mosquitos.
Above us we shall find a shelf of rock which is protected from the
wind. Once there was a camp here.”

“Your father has been with you,” said Akshelah fearfully, through the
cold current. “He made signs to you to come. We must not disobey those
who live with the Great Spirit. Your father will be pleased with me for
coming with you.”

“Here!” I exclaimed, bending and feeling, but this time I was wrong;
the clammy, inaccessible wall met my hands. The ringing of the mining
pick had stopped.

We went on a few more paces, through gloom that brushed the face like
cobwebs, and again I felt. I was right.

The straight wall broke, and there was a passage upward over the rocks.

We went up, with the speed and silence of forest-cats, until we came
out of the wind, and a screen of bushes stopped us. No sound came from
the ledge, which I knew went back and into the cliff on the other side
of those bushes.

“There is a way round higher up,” I said, remembering.

But Akshelah caught and held me tightly.

“Do not move,” she whispered. “A man is coming up.”

Directly she had spoken I heard, and knew we could not get away. This
was the man who had been working upon the rocks, and he would be
carrying a pick, with which he could kill either of us at a blow.

My blood rose excitedly, and I determined that I would use Olaffson as
he had wished to use me.

Drawing Akshelah back, I crawled upon a higher rock, while the man
ascended slowly, as though short of breath, until I felt he was just
upon me. Then I leant down, threw my arms out, and sprang forward. I
had him fair; but he was a large man, and his clothes smelt abominably.
His pick rattled upon the rocks as we fell together, crashing among the
bushes.

My captive spoke gaspingly, but not in fear, nor yet in anger; but
rather as a gambler who has played his one high card, and finds it no
good:

“I’m afraid you have me, Hanafin.”

So soon as he had spoken he was a free man again. The voice was the
voice of Redpath.

He picked himself up at once, and struck a match--probably one of ours
he had lately stolen--and the spluttering light fell upon the loose,
sick-looking face and the black, straight rocks behind him, where slime
glistened, and water dropped like spots of tar.

“Ah, it is you, Petrie!” he said, with unmistakable relief. “Come
inside.”

My strength departed from me.

“I thought you were dead,” I said feebly.

“Well, I suppose I ought to be,” said the adventurer, rather wearily.
“I have been through terrestrial purgatories to retain life alight. I
hardly know why. Come in,” he continued quite heartily. “You remembered
the way. I wondered whether you would.”

I hesitated, and he went on:

“You know your strength, and you know my lack of it. I lost my pretty
little shooter in the quagmire. I’m sorry I haven’t much to offer you,
especially as it happens to be my birthday. I am sixty-seven to-day, my
boy. By Gad! how the years do run!”

In spite of his friendly manner, I took care to keep myself between him
and Akshelah.

“How do I know this place?” I asked my enemy. “I have come along
without making a mistake, and I seem to have seen it all before.”

“You were here with your father. You were a very young child, and I
remember you were terribly in the way,” said Redpath.

Strange that the truth had never occurred to me! So I had already seen
more than a fair share of life. From London to outside Canada; from
civilisation to the unknown lands; in scenes of fighting and madness;
in gold-hunting, and murder, and flight. Truly an adventurous childhood!

When we had come upon the ledge and were out of the wind, Redpath lit a
small lantern, which a few hours before had been MacCaskill’s property,
and liberally offered us deer-pemmican, which he had stolen from our
camp. The light glinted upon our unused tools lying at the back of the
cave. Yet I could never have summoned the courage to accuse this calm
gentleman.

“It is expedient for me to keep the light out of the canyon,” our host
said carelessly. “Did Hanafin express any intention, that you remember,
of tracking me?”

“He thought you could not escape from the mud,” I replied.

Redpath was sitting in darkness, and I could make out his outline,
without being able to see his face. He changed the subject at once, and
said, letting each syllable escape coldly:

“You will understand that in my dealings with you I have played my game
according to my rules. I have generally found that where you cannot
trust the father, neither can you trust the son. It was not many yards
from this spot that your father chose to break the agreement between
us.”

Then I spoke up and told him of the confession of Leblanc.

“It is a lie,” he said casually. “Don’t believe me unless you wish to;
but Olaffson was with me while the deed was taking place. He never
saw the end of Fagge, neither did I. Your father never denied the
deed. Even now I do not say he struck with the intention of killing.
The madman may actually have attacked him in the first place. It was
Leblanc who called us, and I distinctly saw your father kneeling over
the body, his blood-stained knife by his hand.”

“Why should Leblanc put it on to Olaffson?”

“The two men have always hated each other. I believe that Olaffson has
quite recently made an attempt to silence the half-breed.”

“Why didn’t you prevent him?” I said boldly.

“I have no control over Olaffson.” The adventurer was smiling, I was
sure. “He is physically far stronger than I am, and probably would kill
me were he not such a coward, and were I not sometimes useful to him.
Besides, why should I interfere? I should like the man out of the way.”

So far Akshelah had not spoken, though she was always looking towards
Redpath, but now she said calmly:

“You want us far away.”

“You are quite correct,” said Redpath, with condescension.

“You have been to our tepee,” went on the girl. “You have taken our
food and our tools.”

“Again correct,” said Redpath pleasantly. “My dear Petrie, the young
lady does not, of course, understand the first principles of civilised
warfare. I saw my opportunity for annexing your property, and I should
have been a decidedly bad tactician had I neglected to take it.”

Akshelah had arisen. She collected together everything she could find
in the cave, not only our own property, but the few little things
belonging to Redpath, leaving only the small lamp smouldering in the
centre of the rock floor. She arranged these things between us into two
packs, the smaller for me to carry, the larger for herself.

“A clever girl,” said Redpath reflectively. “She is right. You have the
upper hand, and you must take your advantage of the circumstance. Two
small things I will plead for--the handkerchief and the old cashmere
scarf. The possession of a handkerchief in these parts stamps one with
the mark of the gentleman. The scarf once belonged to my mother, and is
interesting as a reminiscence.”

“Put everything back that does not belong to us,” I ordered.

“No,” said Akshelah.

I reiterated my command almost angrily, and the girl obeyed, Redpath
thanking me after his own manner.

“It is a mistake to return more than I asked for.”

I proposed going, lest MacCaskill should be hunting for us, but
Redpath, to my surprise, requested me to favour him with a complete
account of our doings since he had made his terrible plunge off the
_Carillon_. After I had done so, he said softly:

“As usual, I failed to seize my opportunity. You wondered why I did not
shoot you all down while we were waiting on deck for the smash?”

“The _Firefly_ was coming up,” I suggested.

“I knew nothing of it until near the end, as my attention was given to
other things,” he said. “To shoot down unarmed men, in a state of cold
blood, requires an immense amount of nerve. I had not sufficient. That
is the reason I failed. Then, when I had strung myself almost up to the
desired pitch, I saw my pursuer, and knew I was too late.

“I asked the inspector why he wanted you, but he would not say,” I
added, not without curiosity.

“Hanafin is a clever fellow, far too good for police work. He failed
in the Indian Civil, I believe, and ultimately drifted out here, where
he had the sense to keep sober. As an excellent illustration of my
ill-luck, I may say that he is after me for unintentional homicide.”
His dark shadow leaned forward to touch up the dim light of the
lantern. “Everything had failed with me, and I turned to smuggling
liquor across the boundary into a prohibition country. I was bound to
fail again, as the police were very active; but I thought I might do
well for a time, and slip away quietly when affairs should reach a
crisis. One wet night, the load of hay which contained my barrels of
smuggled spirit was surrounded unexpectedly, and I was forced to shoot,
with no intention of injuring, but merely to make an opening for my
escape. At my age a long term in the penitentiary is equivalent to a
sentence of death. Bad fortune, not my aim, steered the lead into the
stomach of a trooper. I got away, assumed the disguise of a priest,
which I had successfully used before, and always carried to meet an
emergency, and escaped into the wilds. Chance led me to the end of a
search I had been making for years. I arrived just too late to find
your father alive.”

There was a silent interval, awkward for me, but presently I said:

“What are you going to do now?”

“I do not propose showing you my hand,” said the adventurer curtly.
“I have too many enemies on the other side of the coulee, without
reckoning the two sailors, with Olaffson here after the gold, and
Hanafin and his hounds after me.”

“I don’t wish to be your enemy,” I said, wondering whether I spoke the
truth.

“Possibly, if you were alone, I might admit you to a small claim,
though I should not permit you to go from here until I was satisfied,”
went on Redpath. “Admit such men as MacCaskill, as Leblanc, and, before
the fall, all the scum of the world would be swarming and sweating up
this canyon, and I should have to rest content with a possibly dried-up
claim. Here I have been puzzling my brains how to preserve the secret
from Olaffson.”

If this were truth, his selfishness was something beyond belief.

“And all for nothing, after all,” he added coldly.

I asked him what he meant, and he said:

“Mosquito Pass has disappeared.”

I stared through the gloom towards the big, indistinct shape, which
went on speaking:

“I have gone by Fagge’s plan. I have found the exact spot he
there indicates, but the pass itself has vanished. I have worked
ineffectually at the place where the opening ought to appear. There is
no way round out of the canyon. Nothing short of a balloon could help
us over the straight wall of rock that runs up to the sky.”

Again I did not believe him, but when I began to speak, his manner
changed.

“You have been here long enough,” he said unpleasantly. “I have had no
rest for hours.”

Akshelah was still undismayed. She picked up MacCaskill’s little
lantern, extinguished its light, and added it to her pack without a
word, but with a glance of contempt cast at the adventurer, sitting
silent and cold in the gloom. Then together we went down again into the
north wind.




THE SOONERS OF ELDORADO


While we ate our breakfast of bacon and biscuits a few ravens hovered,
as though surprised to see us, and their hoarse croaking mingled
dismally with the subdued roar of the wind from the great blow-pipe.
Some chick-adees hopped about the grass and examined us fearlessly.
The defile was filled with gossamers. A golden haze made it difficult
to see any distance along the coulee, and out of this haze two figures
loomed. Presently we discovered the rascally sailors.

“Didn’t I tell ye to keep away?” shouted MacCaskill.

“Captain,” called Jim Morrison, “them soldiers are a-comin’! I saw ’em
on the flats, an’ Gedeon seen ’em too.”

“They’re a-comin’ for to take us,” began Leblanc, who was himself
again; but MacCaskill began to growl.

“How many of ’em?” he demanded.

“All three, major,” answered Morrison, trying to wheedle himself
towards our supplies.

“You two durned fellers have give us away!”

“We never did, colonel. Gospel! We never did. We wouldn’t want er--”

“Shut your stoke-hole. Make your own tracks!”

After which the factor addressed me.

“Let’s get, Rupe. If that Hanafin finds us, we’ll have the whole world
buzzin’ around next week.”

We made a cache of our supplies, and tracked for the canyon. I had
allowed MacCaskill to believe that Olaffson had been the thief of the
previous day, and had instructed Akshelah not to speak of our visit
to Redpath. Because I was myself young and strong, I pitied the old
adventurer who had made such a complete failure of his life. I wanted
the others to believe him dead.

We tracked along the canyon, through the semi-darkness and the moist
wind, until we reached the spruce. The trees were skeletons, ragged
and uncouth, and the logs very small. The hot air shrieked and crept
with insects. I had never known mosquitos so large or so virulent, and
they choked and blinded us with their millions. Akshelah wrapped up
her head; MacCaskill cursed; my own tanned skin pricked in a thousand
places. Suddenly we stumbled over a pile of stones.

Large water-worn pebbles, with pieces of rock as white as milk, had
been heaped into a long mound. At one end faintly appeared a design,
formed simply by a spruce divided some four feet above ground, with a
smaller and shorter piece of the same tree tied by some rotten rope
across.

“A grave,” said the factor, his voice barely audible through the
mosquitos.

There was no need to say more, because we knew what lay buried there.
We came out of the spruce, and over shingle, between the colossal
walls, rounded a spur of rock, which jutted out like a horn, and were
confronted by a wet precipice, honey-combed by small holes, each of
which whistled and hissed as it discharged a separate volume of wind.
Overhead we could just make out a fringe of spruce, like far-away
storm-clouds.

“Wings for three,” said MacCaskill morosely.

“Can’t we find any way round?”

“Likely,” growled MacCaskill. “P’r’aps we’d best start right now,
around by Alaska, and down the Yukon to the Porcupine, and out to
M‘Pherson. Then come along the MacKenzie, till we strike the Slave and
the Athabasca. Do it in a year, if we have luck.”

“Where’s Mosquito Pass?” I said, mindful of what Redpath had told me.

“Where? Right here, I guess.”

“Then where’s the hole?”

“Ask a prophet.”

I examined the face of the cliff, which was largely composed of
streaked granite; near the ground moss grew to a depth of more than
a foot, and a few small trees, very short and bushy, sprang out in
clumps. I forced myself into one of the narrow inlets, where there was
a strong odour of decayed matter, but I saw no signs of a way out, and
the mosquitos covered my face. When I forced myself out, one of the
small trees caught me. It must have been very lightly rooted, for when
I pulled it came away from its crevice.

“We’ll be bit to the bone if we do strike the hole,” said MacCaskill,
who was in the mood to grumble. “See them wind-pipes! If ye got inter
one, ye might fancy yourself a durned shell inside a gun. Golden
Jerusalem!” His face altered wonderfully, and his eyes began to stare.
“Don’t drop it! You’re wastin’ it, ye fool! Look-a-here! Coarse, coarse
as yaller sugar!”

When he gripped at the roots of the little tree I was still holding, I
began to understand.

Golden grains gleamed about the brown dirt still adhering to the roots.
The factor shook this dirt away, but there was no water handy to wash
out the handful.

“There’s two dollars here, I guess,” he chuckled, while before my eyes
was the vision of my father flinging the buckskin bag of stones and
dirt into the Yellow Sands, and in my ears came his sad voice giving me
my first and only lesson.

MacCaskill put the dirt into his hat, and scrambled about the precipice
with the agility of a chipmunk.

“We must find that hole, Rupe!” he shouted through the hot wind. “And
when we’re through, we’ll want to close the pass up, so as no one’ll
be able to follow. See? Golden gates! Come over here and help look,
you gal. You ain’t mope-eyed.”

Akshelah’s wonderful eyes looked back, and she called to me quietly.
She directed my glance, and immediately I discovered Inspector Hanafin
leaning against the spur of rock, watching us, and smoking his pipe.

He stirred when he caught my eye, and came towards us, his bright
colours rather dingy after his rapid crossing of the Bad Lands.

“Hard at it, eh?” he said, in his delightful voice, while MacCaskill
started round violently.

“I thought you had gone away on the _Firefly_,” I said, and MacCaskill
growled.

“The _Firefly_ hasn’t gone away,” said Hanafin. “Do you know that
this is unexplored territory?” he went on, examining the contents of
MacCaskill’s hat, and stirring the dirt lightly with a long finger.

My partner was sulky at having his plans spoilt, and admitted as much
in his most morose fashion. But Hanafin laughed.

“You haven’t come here after Redpath,” complained MacCaskill. “You just
came followin’ us.”

“I belong to the Force,” interrupted Hanafin, stroking the yellow
stripe down his leg. “If I think you have made a discovery of gold, it
is my duty to follow you. Now, you had better tell me what you know.”

“You’ll report it, and we’ll have half the world here.”

The inspector twirled a ring upon his third finger.

“You ought to be old enough to know that you can’t keep a gold-find
private property. Let us suppose that you and Petrie strike something
rich to-day. This is unexplored territory, and you are alone. Next week
you would have seen fifty men here, the following week one hundred,
the next a thousand, and next month a city. We don’t need wires to
telegraph such news as a gold-find. As a matter of fact, it’s lucky for
you that I have come, because I can establish you as legal miners. Are
you going to tell me what you know?”

“I hate to do it,” muttered MacCaskill.

The inspector pulled out a note-book and made some entries. The bed of
shingle on which we were standing lay outside the channel of wind. The
heat, however, was terrible, and the mosquitos thick as dust. Hanafin
turned abruptly.

“Heard anything of Redpath?”

I felt his eyes upon me, while I tried to think out a reply in my
slow-witted fashion; but the next moment I heard his cheerful laugh.

“So he has got here,” said the soldier. Again he bent his head, but as
he was writing, observed: “I’m ready to listen, MacCaskill.”

My partner still demurred.

“You three here; Redpath and his Icelander; the two sailors; my two
boys and myself. Add them up. Ten already for the new mining camp.
Lennie and company on their way. We shall soon be crowded.”

MacCaskill gasped.

“All that crowd comin’?”

“Of course,” said the inspector. “When we were camping in the electric
hollow any half-blind fool could have seen that you knew of something.
It wasn’t hard to understand that those two sailors were on the good
thing, too, for they were hanging about you men like shadows. I didn’t
talk. Lennie and his lot didn’t talk, but anyone could have told that
they had made up their minds to desert the _Carillon_ and follow you
inside. By morning you had gone, following the tracks of Redpath and
his blackguard; the two sailors had gone, following your tracks; I
came, following their tracks; Lennie and Co. are following the tracks
of all of us. That’s how a mining camp grows, my friend.”

“I pass,” said MacCaskill unhappily, and he told the inspector all the
story.

“Good,” said the handsome Englishman, when he had done. He looked
about, stroking his brown moustache, and went on: “This might be made a
regular death-trap for us. Don’t you see?” He was addressing me. “One
man hidden in that spruce could pick us off as he liked. We can only
advance. Rock behind; the canyon upon either side. What a place to
drive an enemy into!”

“Redpath has lost his shooter!” I exclaimed heedlessly. “It fell off
him in the mud.”

“That is the information I wanted,” said Hanafin. “Don’t be alarmed,”
he added to MacCaskill. “Norman is posted upon the far side of the
spruce; Carey, my other boy, at the entrance into the canyon.” He gave
a last pull at his pipe. “Now to find the pass.”

Akshelah had been standing beside me very quietly. Now she broke
silence for the first time.

“Is it the Mosquito Hole?” she said composedly.

We all turned to her.

“There,” she said, pointing away to the far left side, where there was
no moss and no small trees, but merely rugged rock.

“Well, you see more than I can, my girl,” said Hanafin.

We came across the shingle and a bed of sand to where there was thick
wet moss. Under the cliff, streaked with its red and yellow rivulets of
slime, we looked up from ledge to ledge, and from point to point. There
was not the smallest indication of any hole.

MacCaskill began to growl again, and Hanafin was puzzled, but Akshelah
looked at me and laughed.

“You see?” she said, making the slightest upward movement of her head.

I did not see, and I was about to confess as much, when the sound of
a million insect trumpets reached my ears. Then I perceived a great
boulder coming from the face of the cliff, like a misshapen nose, and
to that I pointed with the cry of discovery. The other two remained as
much in the dark as ever.

“Watch the mosquitos!” I called.

The insects were streaming steadily over the summit of the boulder,
like smoke out of a stove-pipe.

“You’re a world-beater, girl!” exclaimed Inspector Hanafin.

The others helped me to ascend the almost perpendicular cliff, where
it was very hard to find and secure a safe footing. However, I was
doing something that I understood, and I soon attained the big boulder,
which did not project as a part of the cliff, but merely reposed as a
separate fragment within a cavity. It might have been lowered there
to cover and conceal the entrance to the hole. I shouted down this
information to my companions.

“See!” said the inspector, pointing over me. “That rock broke off, and
fell exactly upon the hole, which caught it as a cup would catch a
ball.”

I put my head back, and saw that he had hit on the truth. The scar made
by the separation was obvious some way above. Behind the great fragment
opened an aperture into which I might have inserted my head. Here the
villainous mosquitos were pouring in and out.

“Could we work a lever?” called Hanafin.

It was impossible, because the force would have to be exerted against
the opposite side, and there was no foothold there.

“Use your muscles, Rupe!” called MacCaskill.

He spoke half in jest, but I took the remark in earnest. Having secured
safe foothold, I dug my hands into the crevices of the rock, and bent
back with all my might. A movement followed, a sullen, shifting motion,
and a wave of heat passed through me. Then the effort died out, the
rock settled back grimly, and the air became solid with mosquitos.

“That boy could lift an ox!” I overheard Hanafin muttering.

MacCaskill was excited again.

“Stay with it, Rupe! Don’t be beat! He’s a bigger than Jake Peterssen,
but he won’t scrap back!”

I was excited, too. I became far more anxious to shift that great rock
than to enter the land of Bonanza. By that time I had learnt sufficient
to be proud of my strength, because I understood that it was abnormal.
I pulled off my coat, strapped my waist tighter, worked my feet into
the ledge, dug my hands into the unyielding surface, and bent over the
black monster, which was quite as black as the negro I had conquered
at Gull, though far less terrible. I strained, until the surrounding
atmosphere became dark, and something screamed into my ears.

There was again a motion, but whether the rock was coming to me or I
moving to the rock, I did not know. Though I saw nothing, I became in
some way aware that my muscles stood out themselves like projections
of rock, and I felt that the sight was unnatural. Then the monster
appeared to rise out of his bed and come upon me, with a rending and a
tearing, threatening to crush me. Something was giving and parting. Was
it from the roots of the boulder, or from my own vitals? I felt nothing
whatever, no pain, not even an ordinary strain.

I understood the cause. Of course, it was because I had released my
grip, and the great rock had conquered me. It would be impossible to
try again, because my limbs were quivering, and there was no more
strength left in my body than in that of an infant.

A ray of red light flashed out of the far-away darkness, and I
understood that I had fallen to one side, in order that I might escape
some terrible creature, which was crashing upon me to crush out my
life. An avalanche swept past with a cold breath, and I began to fall,
quite easily and contentedly, until something which I took to be a
cloud received and held me, and floated away lightly, still holding me,
and rocking gently up and down.




HOW JUSTICE WORKS


Varied were the sounds that reached my ears when I woke in the green
coulee, to find my limbs limp and my head dizzy. I heard, above the
hissing of the canyon, the stroke of a pick, the scrape of a spade,
the blow of axe and hammer, and the snarl of a saw. I was lying upon a
blanket, with Akshelah kneeling on the moss beside me, fanning away the
insects. She smiled delightedly when I looked round, and commanded me
not to move.

The two troopers were cutting and shaping logs of spruce. MacCaskill
was digging foundations. On the other side, the idle Leblanc and the
incorrigible Morrison were playing poker.

“Three queens is good, Jimmy,” I heard the former saying. “That’s
fourteen dollars you’ve lifted, durn ye! Ye can have it, soon as I wash
out me first pay-dirt.”

“Gimme a voucher,” demanded Jim Morrison.

Then Inspector Hanafin came down from the rocks, carrying a great load
of white grass for thatching, his fur-lined cloak, his gaudy coat and
sword put aside, the rings stripped from his fingers, his sleeves
rolled up, his handsome face marked with dirt.

“Good man!” he exclaimed, when he saw me lift myself, and down he set
his bundle. “Over-strain, but nothing damaged,” he said cheerily.
“You’ll be all right to-morrow.”

MacCaskill heard his voice, and came tramping across.

“You’re the stuff, Rupe!” he called, in splendid spirits. “I’m makin’
our shanty. See?”

“Did I open the hole?” I asked eagerly, and both the men laughed.

“You and that rock come down together,” said MacCaskill.

“You pulled yourself round just in time, and I was able to catch you
as you fell,” went on Hanafin. “The hole’s open; but we didn’t venture
inside, because the place was solid with mosquitos, and the tunnel was
as black as tar. We started a smudge with dry grass and damp moss on
the inside, and the pass may be fairly clear by morning. Ever seen a
mining town start?”

Before I could reply, he saw the two sailors, and his anger came out.

“You idle hounds!” he exclaimed, and going up, deliberately kicked each
man. “Put up those cards, and set down to work, or I’ll pass you out of
this camp before morning.”

The worthless creatures cringed, and swore, and rose reluctantly.

“Norman!” called the inspector, “give these men some work, and if they
don’t stay with it report ’em, and I’ll prescribe something for their
health. We’re not going to have a bad crowd here our first week,” he
added threateningly, and then turned back to me to add: “A mining town
begins, continues, and ends in gambling.”

MacCaskill was chuckling as he made mighty strokes with his spade.

“Say, Rupe, you and me’ll be Bonanza kings in a year, maybe,” he said.
“We’ll be havin’ our pictures stuck inter papers.”

He burst into laughter.

“You old fool,” said Hanafin; but the infection reached him. “My
ambition is to get married, and there’s little chance of that on my
pay.”

He passed on at once, with his load of dry grass, as though ashamed
of the confession, and I understood what it was that inspired the
Englishman. Somebody with bright eyes was waiting for him at home!
The chance of his life had come, and he was not the one to miss it. I
wondered if she would care for him as Akshelah liked to care for me.

Working hours were long, because there was no darkness to trouble
us, and the soldiers made great progress with their building, while
Akshelah did the cooking, and the two sailors the growling. The latter
had come in with the idea of picking up gold, not of working for other
people; but as they had no supplies, they had to make their choice
between working or starving.

Our camp fire burnt redly in the defile during the time of the shadow,
which began half an hour after midnight and lasted until sunrise, two
hours later. When we had done eating, the troopers sang us songs of the
plains and told us yarns of the prairie; and later on, Hanafin spoke
to me of great London, and listened sympathetically to my story, and
the tragedy connected with my father. By that time MacCaskill, Norman,
and the two sailors were asleep; but Akshelah sat opposite, her fine
eyes glowing in the firelight. Outside the light of the fire, Carey,
the tall trooper, did patrol duty. My heart went out to Hanafin, as he
talked to me as an equal, and treated me as such. Hanafin and Redpath
were the two English gentlemen of my acquaintance, and my father was
the only other I had known.

“I have an idea that I can name the man who killed the discoverer of
this place,” said the inspector musingly, but he would say no more.
“What do I think of Redpath? An old and slimy villain, who has reached
bed-rock, and who will now stick at nothing, because he has no lower to
fall. Don’t pity him, my boy. His smooth tongue and his oily manner are
his two strongest weapons. I suppose he is sitting up in his cave now,
rehearsing the details of some new plot with that infernal Icelander.”
He paused, then added: “My duty is divided. I ought to arrest Redpath,
and deliver him at Regina, and I must administer the law here, if our
discovery is what we believe it to be.”

A figure loomed large into the firelight, and Carey saluted.

“A stranger coming up, sir. Maybe a native. Made no reply to my
challenge.”

“Go out and bring him in.”

The disciplined trooper wheeled round and was gone.

Presently he accompanied a very old man, bent and wrapped in an aged
blanket, presenting a weird sight in the glow of the fire. His face
was like a piece of cracked leather, but his teeth, when he grinned in
greeting, were white and sound.

“Ho!” he exclaimed, “white great boy!”

“Ho!” replied Hanafin. “You speak English, do you?”

It was difficult to extract any meaning out of the jargon of mangled
words and distorted sentences which the ancient proceeded to deliver.
He sought to tell us the history of himself, and of his fathers, of
their long struggles with the extinct Iroquois; but when Hanafin
questioned him concerning the adjacent country, the old man became
mysterious. He knew nothing of the land of Bonanza, nor had he ever
heard of Mosquito Pass. His innocence was wonderful; his lying
palpable! He demanded “tobak” as a solace for his old age; and when
this was given him he became bold, a wild longing crossed his aged
face, and he prayed for “the water that burns a man inside.”

“Carey!” exclaimed Hanafin, fingering the fur on his cloak, “you are
sure this is unexplored territory?”

“Yes, sir. It is so marked on all our maps.”

The inspector coughed.

“That civilising agent whisky has evidently preceded us.”

“He may have been inside, sir,” suggested the trooper.

Hanafin put the question in many different ways and dialects; but from
the answers given, he was satisfied that the old native had never been
inside--that is, to civilisation.

“I could almost swear that he came out of the canyon, sir,” said Carey.

I caught Hanafin’s arm, and said unguardedly:

“He comes from Redpath!”

The inspector never glanced at me, but said quietly:

“Thank you for an idea, Petrie.”

He leaned towards the ancient, and in his clear, strong voice
pronounced the following names: “Petrie! Redpath! Leblanc! Joe Fagge!
Olaffson!”

“You hit him every time, sir!” exclaimed Carey, forgetting himself in
his admiration.

“So it was Redpath who gave you whisky years ago! I might have guessed
it,” said Hanafin.

MacCaskill was snoring behind me, and beyond Norman slept quietly in
his blanket. They had not been disturbed by the arrival of the native.
Two dark shapes heaved close to the rocks, themselves like rocks.
These shapes represented Leblanc and Morrison. I saw Hanafin’s eyes
fixed that way.

He went on with his examination of the ancient. Did he know anything
concerning the death of the old half-mad miner? Did he know who killed
him? Had he been present at the time? What talk had he heard? The weird
creature poured forth a flood of negatives, without waiting to listen
to any particular question, and quite obviously without taking in any
part of its meaning.

“I’ll use this old parrot as a test,” said Hanafin grimly. “Carey!”

The trooper stiffened at once.

“Take a light. Lead this old man up to the half-breed yonder. Make him
kneel down and look at the sleeper.”

Hanafin, I fancy, shivered at his own plan, but the night was cold.

“Hold the light just above the old man’s head. We will see if the
half-breed recognises him.”

A thrill passed through me. Over the great cliffs a faint aurora burnt
blue. MacCaskill snored on; Norman never stirred; the two shapes
remained like the rocks behind them. During the silence I heard the
hoarse croak of the ravens I had seen that morning. They were returning
to the defile.

The fire darted up hotly, and a red shower of sparks went aloft and
vanished. Carey’s face looked like bronze as he drew a flaming brand
from the fire. He gripped the ancient with his free hand, and pulled
him along. Hanafin in his long black cloak went on the other side.
Akshelah and I followed. It was like a funeral procession.

We reached the side of the sleepers. A magnetic storm breaking overhead
would scarcely have aroused them. Carey forced the shivering Indian
upon his knees, close to the left shoulder of Leblanc; standing behind,
he held the flaring spruce so that the light fell full upon the pinched
and withered face, weird in age and horrid with fear, while the holder
of the light remained himself invisible. Hanafin passed round to the
half-breed’s right shoulder, and stood between the sleepers.

The light moved this way and that, as the hand of him that held it
shook, and my own breath began to quicken. Hanafin seized Leblanc and
shook him violently. At the same time, his strong voice pealed out
among the cliffs:

“Who was it killed Joe Fagge?”

A scream of awful terror met the startled echoes of that question.

Leblanc had opened his eyes to see a blaze of light, and below the
wizened face and bloodshot eyes of the silent witness--the ghost-like
witness of the deed done twenty years before. The thin lips before him
never stirred while that question rang into his awakened ears. Leblanc
was little better than a beast, and a beast goes mad easily.

Jim Morrison awoke shouting, in time to see his associate leaping away
over the rocks like a huge monkey, making the country horrible with
yells.

Carey dropped his hand, and the sparks again leapt aloft.

The other two sleepers awoke, and called out.

“Guilty,” said Hanafin, in answer to their question.

We saw the poor wretch disappear into the canyon.

Carey and Norman followed a little way, but they soon lost sight of
what had lately been Leblanc, the murderer of half-mad Joe Fagge, and
now, by the working of Justice, a madman himself. They did not go up to
the hot insect-filled cemetery among the spruce.

The strong light began to break, making the cold patches of quartz like
snow, and under the heaving clouds the gossamers lifted and flickered.
The ravens were croaking in the direction of Eldorado. Mosquito Hole
lay that way.

Hanafin turned the ancient Indian out of the camp, and Norman
accompanied the unhappy creature some distance along the defile.

I thought the inspector severe upon that occasion; but he knew his
duty, and I knew nothing. Akshelah declared that the departed was a bad
man, and I expect she was right.

Though I had very little sleep, I felt my strength again when the sun
became strong and hot.

We were a silent party at breakfast--Hanafin grave, MacCaskill subdued,
and Morrison blenching.

After eating, we took up our tools and prepared to start for the
unknown land of treasure.

“Anything to report, Norman?” asked the inspector, as he rolled a
cigarette.

“Nothing, sir.”

But we found the half-breed at Mosquito Hole, or rather that which the
insects had done with and left for a husk. He must have scrambled up
to the hole, certain that his pursuers were upon him, and had slipped
while descending, and fallen, bruising his head. There the enemy would
have been upon him before he could recover--a relentless, poisonous
enemy, in numbers only to be estimated by millions, trumpeting,
stabbing, stifling. Its sightless eyes were filled; the host swarmed in
and out of its mouth, its nose and ears; yet an unimportant fraction
only of that mighty host of mosquitos which had overwhelmed this big,
strong man, and had smothered him to his death.

My father was innocent.

Old man Fagge, the crazy miner, the discoverer of Bonanza, had been
avenged at last by Justice and Inspector Hanafin.

“Bury it among the spruce,” ordered the representative, and his men
averted their heads and carried it away.




V

HANAFIN CITY




BONANZA


Before making our entry into Mosquito Pass, which was a passage through
the cliff, worn probably by water in prehistoric times, we tried to
fan a volume of smoke ahead of us, but the effort was useless, as
the strong wind poured it back into our faces. Lowering ourselves to
bed-rock, we began the advance, the glow from our lanterns falling upon
the saltpetre that coated the rocks, and lighting the mazy clouds of
insects that were always busy about our faces. The sides of the tunnel,
which was some forty feet in length, were smooth and very wet; a few
stalactites pointed from the unseen roof; bunches of moss and some pink
fungus spread over the stones; around our feet were numbers of big-eyed
frogs, bloated and too indifferent to move. The passage curved sharply
at the finish, and we were short of breath by the time we saw the light.

The inspector, my partner, Akshelah, and myself stepped out into the
sunlight which poured over the seamed rocks. The troopers and Morrison
had been left behind to keep guard and to work. The blue sky ahead
floated in vapour, but the tunnel brought out among a wilderness of
huge rocks, so that we could see nothing of the unknown land.

“Frightful hole!” said Hanafin, looking back. “Anyhow, a big smudge
this end will clean out the mosquitos, because the wind will carry the
smoke through from end to end.”

“Where in Jerusalem does the wind come from?” said the factor.

The precipice leaned over slightly, as it towered away some hundreds of
feet above us.

“This wall is the wind-break of the country,” said the inspector. “All
the currents from the north concentrate here, and are forced through
the vent-holes, to make a single volume in the canyon.”

We climbed upward for another hundred yards, and then entered a
channel, about three-eighths of a mile long, with a circular dip in the
centre. From the dip we descended, the channel curving every few yards.

“Columnar basalt,” Hanafin observed, indicating the perpendicular
sides. “The dark grain is magnetic iron. Here we have hornblende. When
I have found mercury I shall be content.”

“Platinum?” queried MacCaskill, whose knowledge of mining was equal to
mine.

“Platinum and gold lie together,” said Hanafin.

Then the channel made its last curve. Below us, unpromising and bare,
and pent in on all sides by chains of strong mountains, spread out--

Bonanza!

I noticed a stronger flush upon Hanafin’s face. He was thinking of that
somebody at home! The muscles down my partner’s neck swelled out. Two
of our small party were excited; two were not. I thought I had never
looked upon a more desolate tract of country.

Away to the south-west went a narrow lake of a dirty-grey colour.
A stream flowed into this lake, and had shoaled a large part of it
near its mouth. Before us a dreary succession of rounded hills rose
and fell, all of the same height, shape, and appearance, very thinly
covered with scraggy spruce and a little black poplar, with some white
birch and pitch-pine. In a very few spots we found a couple of inches
of loam under the moss, the sub-soil being invariably gravel, but the
surface was more usually composed of rock, with sand intervening.

A wide river cut its curving channel between the dreary hills and its
own flats of beach. We could see that this river was very shallow,
because long bars of gravel or silt lifted along mid-stream, and the
“ripple” betrayed other spots where the wash had just sufficient depth
to pass. The stream was reddish in places, probably owing to a rock
bottom of granite, where the gravel had been washed away.

“Bad for boats,” said MacCaskill.

“Chiefly gravel,” said Hanafin. “Sand-bars shift, and gravel doesn’t.
What would you call the temperature of that water?”

MacCaskill looked puzzled. It was a warm day, well over seventy in the
shade. He hazarded:

“Sixty-four.”

“I’ll say fifty-three,” said Hanafin; and when he came to take the
temperature with a little spirit thermometer, he found he was only one
degree out.

Not a bird was to be sighted, not even a creeping thing upon the
ground. It was a land of silence, and desolation, and hidden treasure.

Hanafin pointed out a clear-cut channel, which ran back from the river
between the hills, curving south-easterly, and meeting a similar
channel, which branched off sharply, and ran back, bending out of sight.

“Will you name the creek to the left?” he said, looking at me; then,
seeing my puzzled expression, he added: “Will you give your name to it?”

I suggested that he should have it, but Hanafin replied:

“No. I am more ambitious.”

“Petrie Creek!” exclaimed MacCaskill. “I’ll have the other creek and
valley. Golden gates! MacCaskill Gulch! What?”

“Am I to have nothing?” said Akshelah.

“You shall have the river, my girl,” said Hanafin kindly.

The features of the landscape began to stand out as we crossed the
hills.

“MacCaskill is a great creek,” said Hanafin, with a trace of
excitement; and the old man between us grinned foolishly in the delight
of having his name recorded geographically.

“I don’t know the first thing ’bout minin’,” he admitted. “I guess
I can wash out dirt, but any galoot can do that. What’s that you’ve
picked up?”

“Galena,” said the inspector. “Lead ore.” He began to punish it with
his little hammer, and indicated a tiny white seam with the word,
“Silver.”

MacCaskill snatched at it.

“Let’s feel. How much is it worth?”

“Possibly two-thirds of one cent,” said Hanafin drily, and the factor
flung away the lump in disgust.

While we were walking towards the Akshelah, Hanafin began to reply at
length to one of MacCaskill’s questions.

“How to prospect, eh? Well, we have a theory that the deposits of gold
are stored in certain unknown places, and are distributed about the
main bed of a river by means of the creeks or gulches. When we have
selected a creek, we look for the spot where it bends or slants under
the side of the rock, because, if there is gold to be found in that
particular creek, we shall find it there, though it does not by any
means follow that the bend will prove to be the richest spot in the
valley. We prospect at the angle merely to ascertain whether there is
any gold in the creek or not. The next thing to do is to strike a hole
to bed-rock, and that’s where the work begins. It is best done in the
winter, when the water is frozen.”

Hanafin broke off, and looked straight ahead with anger upon his face.

We were close to the river, near a shallow part where a bar of gravel
made a bridge across three-fourths of the stream. Hanafin turned to
Akshelah.

“Do you see those stakes, my girl? There!”

“Yes,” said Akshelah, and when she spoke I saw them, too.

“They mean that we are not the first here. Some miner has been before
us, and has staked out the claim below the forks.”

“Then we’ll get to work, and pull up his posts,” suggested MacCaskill.

“So there is at least one experienced miner already in Bonanza,” began
Hanafin.

“And his name is Redpath,” I added.

“What an indomitable man!” exclaimed Hanafin. “Directly Petrie had
opened the hole, he must have fought his passage through the mosquitos,
and here he is, washing out for all he’s worth.”

“There are no men,” said Akshelah.

“Not likely. Directly they saw us come out of the channel they would
have escaped into their holes,” said Hanafin. “Well, let’s make a raft.”

We cut down the three largest spruce trees we could find, lopped them,
and dragged the logs thus made across the bar to the water. While I
cut the notches in these logs, the others went for the smaller trees,
and when we had sufficient, our raft was quickly afloat and across
the narrow channel, which was nowhere more than four feet in depth,
MacCaskill pushing with a white birch pole on one side and I upon the
other. We went up to the side of the hill and down to where the creeks
forked, until we reached the claim which had just been opened.

“Two men!” cried Akshelah, pointing out the tracks.

Hanafin measured the distance with his eye, saying:

“A gulch claim is two hundred and fifty feet from post to post. Redpath
is no amateur. A legal post stands four feet above ground, and is flat
on both sides for at least one foot from the top. You see, these posts
are perfectly legal.”

“Can’t we pull ’em up?” asked the factor, and when the inspector had
replied in the negative, he objected:

“They ain’t legal miners.”

“Can you give me proof that the men do not hold free miners’
certificates?” said Hanafin sharply. “This claim cannot be touched
unless the miner who has staked assigns, or allows his ownership to
lapse.”

“And by all the gold of Jerusalem, here he comes!” shouted MacCaskill.

Down the hillside Olaffson proceeded unconcernedly, making a straight
line for us, and presently we could hear him whistling.

“Mornin’!” he called insolently, when half-a-dozen yards away.

“Well?” said Hanafin, fixing him with his keen glance. “What’s your
business?”

“With you, mister. You’re mining recorder of the district, I guess?”

“Yes; until the Department makes an appointment.”

“I want to take out a miner’s certificate, an’ I want to record a
claim.”

“You do, eh?” called MacCaskill, moving out menacingly. “And what
you’ll get is an everlastin’ poundin’ with a spruce stick--”

“If there’s anything personal between you and this man, wait till I
have done with him,” interrupted Hanafin curtly.

The factor turned to me, growling and fuming, and I was hot enough to
say:

“We’ve got a lot against him. He burnt my house at Yellow Sands. He
tried to settle me at Gull--”

“I’ve not fallen in love with the man,” interposed Hanafin. “Anyhow,
the charges you bring are rather outside my jurisdiction. This man is
merely an agent. He is repeating the lessons his principal has taught
him. Did Redpath ask you to take out a certificate for him as well?” he
asked ironically.

The stunted figure held its ground.

“Redpath’s gone.”

“Who’s been working this claim with you?”

“An old Indian.”

“Lift up your foot,” ordered Hanafin.

The Icelander looked startled, but thought it best to obey.

Hanafin called Akshelah.

“Look at that boot. Now will you find me one of his partner’s tracks?”

Akshelah found it immediately upon the hard sand. Hanafin knelt by the
impression, took a little tape-measure from his pocket, and measured it
every way. When he had finished, he consulted his pocket-book. Then he
smiled.

“When Redpath escaped me that night he shot the trooper, I took the
precaution of measuring a footprint he left in the mud before mounting.
Now I am able to prove that this man is a liar!”

MacCaskill chuckled. The scoundrels had met more than their match.

“You may carry a message from me to your master,” went on Hanafin, and
he scribbled upon a leaf of the ever-present pocket-book, and gave
the note into the Icelander’s short hand. Then he said: “Give me ten
dollars.”

“Yes, mister,” said Olaffson, and his face became almost cheerful as he
handed over the money, which he had ready in bills crushed up in his
hand. Hanafin began to write again, and he spoke each word aloud as he
set it down:

“Dominion of Canada. Free miner’s certificate. Non-transferable. Date.
Number One. Valid for one year only. This is to certify that--What’s
your first name?”

“Don’t know.”

“Olaffson,” wrote down the inspector. “Where do you come from?”

“Anywhere.”

“Of Hanafin City,” wrote the owner of the name, a smile about his
mouth, “has paid me this day the sum of ten dollars, and is entitled
to all the rights and privileges of a free miner for one year from the
date of this certificate.” He wrote his signature, tore out the leaf,
and gave it to the applicant. “Come to my office after noon to-morrow
to record your claim. A grant for placer-mining is too lengthy to make
out here. The fee will be fifteen dollars.”

“Here it is, mister!” exclaimed the Icelander, holding out his other
hand.

“You have learnt your lesson well. I cannot take the money now. Bring
it to-morrow to my office in Front Street. And remember,” he added
curtly, “this is your claim, and any other man who works upon it
without your consent renders himself liable to be arrested.”

As we turned away, MacCaskill began to complain.

“Why did you want to use him so good?” he demanded.

Hanafin answered contentedly: “I think I have checkmated Redpath.
Wait until you see how Olaffson’s noble character develops under what
I have said to him.” His manner changed, and he went on briskly:
“Let’s prospect. If there is gold in the creek, we shall find surface
indications beneath yonder rocks. I’ll wash out the first pan for luck.”

He stopped just under the bank, where the creek bent obliquely,
and taking MacCaskill’s shovel, rapidly cleared away the surface
accumulations, and turned up the coarse gravel and stones, throwing
this waste aside with quick, easy motions.

“Now for pay-dirt!”

He lifted a little of the finer gravel into the pan, which MacCaskill
held out with nervous hands.

“First we strike our bar,” said Hanafin, as we went down to where the
water ran to the river, “then wash out a few panfuls of the gravel or
sand, and watch for the colours. By the number we find it becomes easy
after a little experience to calculate how much in cold cash the bar
will yield daily.”

“This dirt’s awful rich!” gasped MacCaskill, shifting the pan from side
to side. “Look at the specks a-glitterin’!”

“Wait until the water goes in. Give me the pan.”

Hanafin took the shallow steel dish, and inserted it into the water
with a deft side motion, bringing it out again with the same movement.

A cry of admiration broke from the mercurial factor when a host of
sparklets sprang towards the surface of the pan, and settled down
slowly through the water, turning over and over.

“Look at that, Rupe!” he shouted, hitting me with his elbow.

“No good,” said Hanafin grimly; and MacCaskill’s joy departed from him.

“What! Ain’t that gold?” he asked angrily.

“Flake gold. There’s less than one cent’s worth there. Those specks
are flatter than gold-leaf. If there is pay-dirt, it will be among the
black sand at the bottom.”

The inspector continued to whirl the pan, and then he inclined it,
still shaking, with a more gentle and rotary movement, and we saw the
gravel washed out into the water of the creek, until nothing was left
except a deposit of black sand, which we learnt was pulverised magnetic
iron ore.

“Fine or coarse, or none at all?” the inspector muttered, bending low.

“I suppose fine dirt ain’t no pay?” suggested MacCaskill morosely.

“Yes, but it involves slow and laborious methods,” replied the man who
shook the pan. “We should have to introduce a little mercury to form an
amalgam with the gold. This amalgam we should then heat on a shovel,
until the mercury had been given off in vapour, and the gold would
remain in a lump. Look there!”

He had washed away nearly all the black sand, and now pointed to some
tiny specks nestling by themselves in a corner of the pan.

“Coarse--ten cents at the least.”

“Golden gates!” exclaimed MacCaskill. “You call this gold-minin’! I
wouldn’t a-troubled to have picked out that little bit of stuff.”

“Ten cents to one pan is excellent pay. Far less than that gives a grub
stake,” said Hanafin. Then he looked up at MacCaskill’s dissatisfied
countenance. “Nobody who has not been a miner understands anything
about this business. Whenever the discovery cry gets heard, thousands
come racing out of the world full of the idea that they are just going
to stake, record, dig and pick out lumps of solid gold, which they
will exchange for cash, and return to the world with a fortune. This
is the reality. This is a rich country, boys, which is going to make
millionaires. Now I’ll show you where to stake.”

We followed Hanafin to where the creeks joined, and below this
junction, going in the direction of the running water, between
Olaffson’s claim and the river, he stopped.

“The gold from both creeks should be held here. Number One claim may be
the richest, as Redpath guessed. Cut your stakes, and I’ll measure out.”

When we had staked out Number Three, which was the factor’s, I went
back to my own. On the flatted side of the post I saw that Hanafin had
fastened a piece of paper, and I found to my great delight that I was
able to read what he had written. The paper bore the name of my claim,
“Number Two MacCaskill,” its length, the date, and my name in full.

But “Number Four MacCaskill” was being staked, and Hanafin smiled
mysteriously as he affixed its description on the flat side of the near
post.

“Mr. John Smith!” exclaimed MacCaskill, after reading. “Who in
Jerusalem’s he?”

Hanafin’s mysterious smile continued.

“He’s something by necessity out of red-tape,” he said. “It’s not for
me to break the letter of the law, but a man must help himself when he
has nothing beyond his pay. I know, anyhow, that you won’t give ‘Mr.
Smith’ away.”

“Good luck to ye!” exclaimed the factor heartily, and I endorsed his
cry.

We ferried back across the Akshelah, climbed up the channel, and so
back towards Mosquito Hole.

MacCaskill had one question to ask:

“What might that message have been you sent to Redpath?”

Hanafin replied:

“The man has gone too far. I am after him for the shooting of one of
my own boys, and he stakes out a claim under my nose, and sends his
partner to me to record for him. The message I sent was that I had
given instructions for him to be shot on sight.”

And MacCaskill chuckled delightedly.

We reached the brow, where we could take our last look over Bonanza,
and here Akshelah called out. Two pigmy figures were to be seen toiling
and sweating upon “Number One MacCaskill.”

Hanafin broke the silence.

“One can’t help admiring sheer perseverance. We will leave him to his
treasure-hunting now, but to-morrow we shall all be down there, and
then--exit Redpath.”

We descended the canyon, but by the time we regained the defile, old
friends were awaiting us--Lennie, Pete, Dave, and company, all with
great packs containing supplies they had taken from the _Carillon_.
They greeted us loudly, and not without a certain amount of chaff.

“So you have got here, you crowd!” said MacCaskill, very morosely.

“And we ain’t here for our health either,” piped Lennie joyously.
“The ole boat can lie on the mud while I stake out me claim. I ain’t
cheatin’ anyone. See? She belongs to rich companies, an’ ye can’t cheat
companies.”

“Say! ain’t you ben hustlin’?” exclaimed Pete admiringly. “Run a big
buildin’ up in jest no time, ye have!”

The soldiers had done their work quickly, and the log-house looked well
upon the long green slope.

Suddenly Hanafin stepped out of the aperture left for the door, and
fastened a notice outside.

We all gathered round to read:--

  “Temporary Barracks and City Hall, Hanafin City.

          Inspector, HENRY P. HANAFIN,
          (North-West Mounted Police),
       Temporary Acting Gold Commissioner
             and Mining Recorder.”

The men took off their hats and gave three wild cheers for Hanafin City.

We had guarded our secret well, MacCaskill and I; and yet, despite
our care, the population on the day of our arrival had numbered ten.
Already it was eighteen.




DISQUALIFIED


It was noon, and there was not a sound in the city. Front Street
consisted as yet of the log-built town hall, our own unfinished
residence, and a tent brought from the mud-held ship. The population
had gone through the tunnel into Bonanza, with the exception of
Hanafin, Akshelah, and myself. MacCaskill had gone early to his claim,
having the night before improvised, with Norman’s aid, a marvellous
rocker. Even the uncouth Morrison had gone after the dirt. He had
passed me earlier, and I had asked him whether he felt lonely now that
justice had overtaken his late associate, only to receive the reply,
which I might have looked for:

“Sure! Ye see, he owed me fourteen dollars.”

I had arranged with my partner to stay and complete our shanty, so that
we might have shelter in case of bad weather. I had worked all morning,
and had finished everything, except the thatching, when Hanafin came
up and handed me the first official documents I had ever received, one
being my free miner’s certificate, the other a grant for placer-mining
over “Number Two MacCaskill.”

“How old is mademoiselle?” asked the handsome soldier, turning to the
girl with a smile, which, from some cause known only to herself, did
not appear to fascinate her.

I happened to know, and replied for her that she would be eighteen at
the beginning of winter.

“Ah, that’s a pity!” said Hanafin sincerely. “Eighteen is the
age-limit. Had you been a few months older I could have given you a
certificate also.”

“I do not want the yellow dirt,” said Akshelah, quite angrily.

The inspector laughed, and muttering “Happy girl!” walked back to what
he called his office.

“Tell me what is written there,” said Akshelah, eyeing the sheet
suspiciously.

I was not sure whether I could read it, but I tried, and made a
wonderful success. Slowly, and with not a little blundering over the
harder words, I made out the following:--


    “No. 2. Department of the Interior.

    “Agency, Hanafin City, North-west Athabasca (?), July, 1895.

  “In consideration of the payment of the prescribed fee by Rupert
  Petrie, of Yellow Sands, the Minister of the Interior hereby grants
  to the said Rupert Petrie, for the term of one year from the date
  hereof, the exclusive right of entry upon the claim registered
  as Number Two, MacCaskill Gulch, Akshelah River district, in the
  country called Bonanza, for the miner-like working thereof, and the
  construction of a residence thereon; and the exclusive right to all
  the proceeds realised therefrom, upon which, however, the royalty
  prescribed by the regulations (to be approved of by Order in Council)
  shall be paid.

  “The said Rupert Petrie shall be entitled to the use of so much
  of the water naturally flowing through or past his claim, and not
  already lawfully appropriated, as shall be necessary for the due
  working thereof, and to drain his claim free of charge.

  “This grant does not convey to the said Rupert Petrie any right of
  ownership in the soil covered by the said claim; and the said grant
  shall lapse and be forfeited unless the claim is continuously, and in
  good faith, worked by the said Rupert Petrie or his associates.

                                                 “HENRY P. HANAFIN,
                                             “(Acting) Mining Recorder.”

Akshelah sighed.

“And you are going to look for the yellow dirt, too?” she said
lingeringly.

“That’s what I came away for,” I answered her lightly.

“He made you come.” She meant MacCaskill. “You did not want to come
away. You were happy beside the bright waters, and I was very happy. We
caught the fish, and we hunted.” Her eyes were full of tears. “You have
forgotten all that, and you never laugh with me now.”

She was partly right. I was growing worldly-wise, but I did not
forget. I could not forget the walks with Akshelah over the rolling
grass-hills, among the tall sulphur-lilies, and those idle paddles on
my own little laughing water. I did not forget the hunting expeditions,
and those songs and stories we had sung and told to each other, and
those foolish kisses under the sunshine, and sometimes under the moon.
How could I forget those happiest days? All had been so peaceful in
that life which seemed so far away, until Redpath, the destroyer of
trust, had come to link my quiet world with his, and all since then had
been fighting and deceit. Had not this place and its gold ruined my
father?

The voice of Akshelah was in my ears.

“We shall stay here, and Pepooa will creep up around us, and Mispoor
will fall and hold us. The long night will come, and the ghost-lights
will whisper always in the sky.” She shuddered. “And there will be
beast-men! I see them coming, the men who will drink hot waters, and
fight one another through the long night, and they will take me away
from you, and I shall die--far from my own people and my own land. And
you will learn the ways of that world; you--you will drink hot waters,
and fight too.”

Had my poor maid gone on in that strain, I think she would have
prevailed upon me to have taken her home; but the figure of Hanafin
stood out, and I heard his voice shouting to me.

“Be brave, little squirrel,” I said, taking her two small hands. Then I
hurriedly kissed her wet eyes, and obeyed the inspector’s call.

Olaffson was inside the office, sitting upon a log, his white face
malevolent and hungry-looking.

Hanafin turned to me, and spoke at once.

“You told me, Petrie, that the late Leblanc upon a certain occasion
accused this man of being the murderer of old Fagge. I want this matter
cleared up finally, both for your sake and for the sake of the old
man’s connections south. I understand you have accused the late Mr.
Petrie of being the murderer,” he went on, addressing the Icelander,
who broke in at once:

“That was Redpath. He thought Petrie done it, I guess. I know now
Petrie didn’t, but I never thought ’twas Leblanc till t’other night. He
’cused me, ’cause he hated me bad. I took a knife to him one time, but
he druve me to it.” He paused, and wiped his mouth. “Now, Jim Morrison
mighter told ye quite a bit. They was pards, an’ Gedeon was man to
ole Fagge for quite a while. The ole chap was moony.” The Icelander’s
voice grew louder with confidence. “Ole man struck a wonderful rich
find right here. Right here! A reg’lar hole of dirt, coarse dirt, an’
nothing but dirt.”

Perspiration started out upon his slimy forehead, and he paused for
breath, blinking at us.

“Get along,” said Hanafin quietly.

“Leblanc knew of it, an’ no one ’cept him an’ ole man did know of it.
So Leblanc got to work, an’ fixed ole man late one night when he was
asleep, an’ when Petrie was asleep. Ye see, he reckoned to come back
one time, an’ open up that hole. P’r’aps he never split to Jim. P’r’aps
he was hidin’ it from Jim.”

“Stay a bit,” said Hanafin. “How did you find out this?”

The Icelander grinned.

“The night he an’ Jim got here, I come around to try an’ level up
things wi’ Leblanc. Jim had lef’ him, an’ gone to Mister Petrie’s camp.
Gedeon was a-sittin’ by a rock, sorter stupid wi’ hunger, an’ a-talkin’
to hisself, so pleased to have got here. I set beside that rock, an’
listened to his talk. That’s how I found out. I might a-been his
priest, an’ him a-confessin’.”

“You tried to kill him,” I interjected.

“He shifted hisself by accident, an’ I scarce touched him. He was a
dirty murderer, anyhow,” said the little wretch, unabashed.

“You told this to Redpath?” questioned Hanafin.

“Had to,” admitted Olaffson, though he had only yesterday sworn
that Redpath was not in the district. “Ye see, Gedeon never let out
jest where the place was, an’ I don’t know the first thing ’bout
prospectin’. It was somewhere near where them two creeks jined, an’
I told Redpath, an’ he staked out that claim at the forks.” He spat
a chew upon the ground, and got up, smacking his two stunted hands
together. “An’ now I’ve beat him. Gol’ darn it, but I’ve beat him every
way!”

“Now we understand why Redpath stops here,” said Hanafin to me. “Now
we understand the reason for that haste of his.” He added still more
slowly: “Now you understand how I have checkmated Redpath.”

“How?” I exclaimed.

“Listen,” said Hanafin.

The Icelander was raving in his triumph.

“What’s his price, inspector? What’s the Government figure for Redpath?
I’ve got him for sale. Ye shall have him. I’ve got no more use for him.
I’ll sell him, body an’ blood an’ bones.”

The little miscreant shivered with his excitement.

“How about the claim?” suggested Hanafin.

“It’s mine,” slobbered the Icelander. “Redpath paid the ten dollars
for the certificate an’ the fifteen for the grant. Redpath found the
claim, an’ measured it, an’ staked it out, an’ showed me what to do.
But I’m certified owner, an’ he ain’t allowed on that claim. The claim
is registered to me; Redpath can’t come upon it. He don’t dare look
upon it. He don’t dare come outer his dug-out, ’cause he’ll be shot
on sight, ’cause he’s wanted for murder. You’re right, mister; you’re
right all the way. You’ve beat him; an’ the claim’s mine, an’ all the
gold in it’s mine, an’ I’m a-goin’ to dig for it right now. Jest gimme
me claim, mister; jest gimme the grant what you promised me. Number
One MacCaskill. That’s the hole. Here’s the fifteen dollars--Redpath’s
fifteen--mister inspector. You’ve beat Redpath, an’ I’ll give him away
to ye, ’cause he’s no more bit of use. I’ll sell him to ye cheap, body
an’ clothes an’ big talk.”

Breathless and panting, he pushed the money out towards the inspector,
but Hanafin did not take it.

Hanafin had beaten Redpath. That was true; but was it true that
Olaffson had beaten the inspector? Was the Icelander even then playing
his part, and speaking the words taught him by Redpath? My eyes were
upon Hanafin, and it appeared to me that a sense of failure was set
upon his face. Presently he stirred.

“Carey!” he called.

After a pause of intense silence, broken by Olaffson’s excited
breathing, he called again:

“Carey!”

“Here, sir!”

The soldier-policeman appeared at the door, struggling into his tight
jacket.

“This man, Carey, this Icelander--his name is Olaffson--has, I find, an
exceedingly bad record, and I have just discovered that he is guilty,
upon his own confession, of attempting murder within the city limits.
Take him a mile along the defile, set him south, and instruct him to
continue in that direction. If you find him about the city or Bonanza
after to-day, arrest him at once, and bring him before me. If he
should, on any such occasion, attempt to escape, you may shoot.”

“Yes, sir.”

The next minute Hanafin was speaking to me in his usual pleasant manner.

“You must abandon your present claim, Petrie, and take Number One
MacCaskill, which is at present vacant. I will alter the description in
your grant, if you will give it me. No! It is not allowed to argue with
a superior officer. There’s a miner’s motto, which you will do well to
remember, and it is this, ‘Never be satisfied with a grub stake.’”




THAT PRIEST AGAIN!


On a certain evening, about eleven o’clock, when the sun was setting
reluctantly over the western end of the defile, a lone stranger came
into the line of vision of MacCaskill and myself, an elderly man,
thin and grizzled, sweating under the weight of a heavy pack. Once he
stopped to shade his eyes and peer about, then, having probably caught
sight of the log buildings, he tramped on and approached us as we sat
outside our shanty. MacCaskill had been grumbling, because he had not
yet grown accustomed to ten-cent pans.

“I want to pick it up in lumps,” he growled, pinching his little
buckskin bag, which was rapidly becoming fat. Then he, too, caught
sight of the stranger, who came up to us, as though to greet old
friends. “See there!” exclaimed the factor hoarsely, “here comes
another! Another damned sooner!”

The elderly man let down his pack, and nodded very gravely.

“How are ye?” he said, in a high nasal voice, proceeding to mop his
face with a dirty shirt-sleeve. “How do I come, eh? One of the first,
I guess. No big crowd ben before me, eh?” he said, mouthing each word
slowly. “What’s yer population, pard?”

MacCaskill enlightened him. The grizzled man appeared to be incapable
of smiling, but he gave me the impression of being satisfied.

“Well,” he said, “I’m always right on time. That’s me, pards! If I
don’t come in wi’ the first, I don’t come in at all. I’m Moccasin Bill,
pards. That’s me. What are ye callin’ the place?”

“Hanafin City,” I replied, as MacCaskill was relighting his stone pipe.

“Well, an’ a vurry nice city,” said Moccasin Bill, allowing his eye
to roam along the defile, where the shadows were beginning to gather.
“Pards, I’ll jest set right down, an’ get some supper acrost me. Ain’t
got a saloon here yet?”

“We’re only startin’,” admitted MacCaskill.

The old man opened his pack, and produced some fat bacon and a fry-pan.

“Tell ye,” he said profoundly, “the hull world’ll be on a buzz be now,
I guess. The Noo York papers, an’ the London papers, an’ the whole
durned rest uv ’em will be jest runnin’ over ’bout this place.”

MacCaskill growled out his anger.

“How the Jerusalem have they come to know?”

Grizzled Bill’s bacon began to hiss in the pan. He turned his solemn
face towards us.

“Ye ain’t reg’lars. No offence, pards. Can see ye ain’t. What’s the use
o’ tryin’ to explain things what can’t be explained?”

“If it hadn’t been for me, this place wouldn’t ever a-been discovered,”
boasted MacCaskill falsely.

The new-comer was as cool as ice.

“Listen-a-here.” He turned his bacon, and sniffed hungrily at the
greasy steam. “I ben in South Africa a-minin’, an’ I ben in West
Australy a-minin’, and I ben in Californy a-minin’.” He paused, then
added: “Now I come here a-minin’. I’m a lone hand. I allus have been a
lone hand.”

“Ain’t ye got any relations?” asked MacCaskill, when the miner stopped.

“The world’s a-crawlin’ wi’ ’em. I was a-goin’ to say this, pard, jest
this: I’ve packed along one time wi’ me ole ox, or me ole hoss, an’
maybe I’d see a pesky vulture a-comin’ away off, just like a bug en the
sky, an’ then another, an’ then another, an’ lots uv ’em, all like bits
o’ bugs. They’d be coming my way, see, an’ I’d say to meself, ‘There’s
a funeral.’ Me ole ox, or me ole hoss, would pack along right as right,
good an’ strong; but the bugs would get bigger, an’ turn inter big
bugs, and the big bugs would get bigger yet, and black, an’ they’d come
around, a-flappin’, an’ a-callin’, an’ a-rubber-neckin’ wi’ their ugly
bare necks. Then down would go me ole ox or me ole hoss, wi’ staggers,
or fly, or pissen-grass, an’ then the vultures would sorter chuckle,
jest like, ‘Told ye there was a blow-out a-comin’ to us.’ An’ down
they’d come, an’ I’d know that the ole pack-ox or the ole pack-hoss
would have to go. I can’t tell ye how them vultures knew, ’cause I
wouldn’t know meself, that the ole beast was a-goin’ to break. But I
says this to ye, that if a pesky bird can do that, a worldful o’ pesky
men oughter be able to do as good.

“If a man gets to find gold, he ain’t a-goin’ to keep it to hisself.
No, sir! ’Tain’t in nature. Other men are a-comin’ up to have their
bite. They smells it en the air. They feels it en their innards. The
wind whistles uv it, an’ off they start, a-sniffin’ to find the place,
like half a million dogs. They’ll be comin’ in be scores every day. I
passed quite a few on me way. They’re comin’ in be boat mostly, an’ I
come in be land. Me ole pack-hoss played out yesterday, an’ I come on
wi’ me own trotters. Moccasin Bill ain’t never a-goin’ to get left. Not
him!”

The professional miner spoke deliberately, pausing often to find the
word he wanted. When he had done this lengthy speech he started upon
his supper. After the arrival of Moccasin Bill an endless stream of
miners, and those who live upon them, came in; one week of such an
inrush caused the very characteristics of the place to change. Log
buildings sprang up with inconceivable rapidity along both sides of
the defile, making Hanafin City a fact as well as a name. A large
store became under course of erection, and across its unfinished front
suspended a huge canvas, bearing the inscription, “The Bonanza Trading
and Supply Association.” Bales and boxes of such supplies were packed
by oxen over the Bad Lands from Lake Peace. The men of the Association
drew the _Carillon_ off the mud-flats, patched her up, and steamed
her away south, to report how they had discovered her, wrecked and
deserted. Lennie and his men kept their own counsel. Two saloons were
erected. One roulette table had already arrived, and was working day
and night. A branch of one of the leading banks had been established. A
detachment of police arrived, and a Government representative to assume
the functions of Gold Commissioner.

The Government were hard at work defining that portion of the
north-west territory which we had named Bonanza, and great power
was given to Inspector Hanafin to adjust the mining law, and to
administer the same. He was instructed to meet any difficulties that
might occur by the exercise of his own judgment, without waiting for
authority. He assumed the local rank of Commissioner, and later a post
from Ottawa awarded this rank to him absolutely. A mail service into
the interior was inaugurated, police stations were established, and
patrols traversed the country. Quite at the end of August the flag of
the Hudson Bay Company went up, and Fort Hanafin became marked upon
the map. By that date a theatre had been built upon Front Street,
and performances, known as variety shows, were given nightly. After
supper the city was alive with lights and singing, with drunkenness and
gambling, and there were women in the place.

Mosquito Pass had been blown up, and a great rent appeared in the
cliffs where the miners passed to and from Bonanza. The spruce bluff
had vanished, the trees having been cut down for use, and the graves
of Joe Fagge and Leblanc, his murderer, had been trampled out. The
opening of the cliffs made the canyon far less of a blow-pipe, and I
missed the wild music, which only became sonorous in times of storm.
Along both sides of the Akshelah numbers of tents showed, with heaps
of dump, scores of rockers and sluice boxes, shining picks and spades,
and clumsy barrows, and all around figures of men, running, stooping,
shovelling, washing out, apparently never at rest. “MacCaskill” and
“Petrie” creeks were staked out for miles back. River claims and hill
claims were also staked out, every alternate ten claims being reserved
for the Government. A royalty of ten per cent. was levied by the Gold
Commissioner, and collected, in spite of loud grumblings from the
miners, on the gross output of every claim.

Number One MacCaskill was my claim; Number Two was occupied by the
“Athabasca Mining Syndicate, Limited”; Number Three was leased to
MacCaskill; Numbers Four to Eight to Lennie and Company; Number Nine to
Moccasin Bill; Number Ten to one Jake Peterssen; while Numbers Eleven
to Twenty, both inclusive, belonged to the Dominion Government.

It will be remembered that Hanafin had staked out a claim under
the style of Mr. John Smith, because, owing to something he called
“red-tape,” his position debarred him from working as a miner, or
holding a claim. When he had made me shift my stakes, after the
ejection of Olaffson, he had himself come into Number Two, and had
recorded this claim to the Athabasca Mining Syndicate, which was
himself. He hired two Swedes, who had come in, like so many, without
supplies, to work the claim for him as agent of the company, at a
remuneration of five dollars and food per day. When these assistants
had made sufficient money they started mining on their own account, and
then Hanafin simply hired two more improvident hands, and thus the work
of the Company proceeded.

Claim Number Ten was worked by my former opponent, Jake Peterssen. The
tidings of Bonanza had quickly reached Gull in that inexplicable manner
which Hanafin named “wireless telegraphy,” and many of the men threw
up their work upon the lumber and “came in,” Peterssen among them. He
told me that I had spoilt his right arm, and that he was no good for
lumbering; but when he gripped my hand in greeting, I felt glad that I
should never be called upon to stand up to him again.

By the end of August all these things had come to pass, and still
people were flocking in every day, despite the fact that the night
began to threaten, and that winter was near. To show how the camp was
governed by Hanafin, I narrate the following incident:--

A gang of bullies arrived, with no intention of mining or doing honest
trade, but simply bent upon ruling the place by fear, and living by
means of terrorism. These foul-mouthed beast-men, as Akshelah rightly
named them, spent most of the day in the principal saloon, drinking at
the expense of others, and when satisfied for the time, came out upon
Front Street, and, having captured a certain honest little character,
Jimmy Carruthers by name, proceeded to haze him in front of the saloon.
The little man, who had come into town to purchase supplies, took the
treatment good-naturedly at first, but presently one of the bullies
ordered him to dance for their edification. When he did not come up to
expectation, the brute poked at his ribs with a pointed stake, thereby
reaching the limits of Jim’s endurance. He refused to gratify his
tormentors further, thereupon the chief bully pulled out a revolver,
and shouted:

“Dance, ye little cuss, or I’ll make a hole through ye!”

Hanafin proceeded up the street with Norman at his side, but the
disturbers of the city’s peace did not see them. I noticed that the
Commissioner quickened his walk. Jimmy Carruthers was blenching from
the revolver, because it was obvious that the half-drunken bully was no
respecter of life, and was calling out for mercy, when Hanafin pushed
him aside.

“Norman!” exclaimed the Commissioner, “arrest that man.”

The bully went dark with anger.

“Arrest me, ye skunk! Arrest me--”

There he stopped, threw up his arms, coughed once, choked, and fell
forward. An angry little curl of smoke floated away down Front Street,
to the accompaniment of a few sharp echoes among the cliffs. The bully
had drawn upon Norman, and the Commissioner shot him dead at once.

Then he rounded upon the others, who snarled menacingly, and advanced
in a half-circle, brave because of their numbers. The Commissioner
whipped out his long sword, and the bullies stopped, more, I fancy,
because of the cold light in Hanafin’s eyes than for fear of the cold
steel.

“Put up your hands,” said the Commissioner quietly, “else I’ll have
the crowd of you hanged before supper. This mining camp is in British
territory, I’ll make you remember, and I am the representative of the
Queen.”

He removed his little forage cap, and Norman followed the example of
his chief. The bullies weakened, and obeyed with surly oaths. Norman
was ordered to search each one, and the majority were found to be
carrying secret weapons. These were marched off to the barracks, and
sentenced to one month’s imprisonment. That same evening a proclamation
was issued and posted about the city.

After the date of that proclamation, any man found carrying hidden
weapons, either in the town or about Bonanza, would be fined one
hundred and fifty dollars for a first offence. For a second, he would
be deprived of all miner’s privileges, and be dismissed from the
district. The miners read, and realised what sort of a representative
they had over them.

Hanafin City became the capital of the most law-abiding mining country
that the world has ever seen; so said the old miners. Yet when I went
to visit the man who had done this, I found him soaking his hands in
hot water, to prevent his fingers from losing their delicate shape
and whiteness. I am never likely to know whether Hanafin, who was
a combination of cleverness, coolness, courage, and conceit, was a
typical Englishman, but I like to think he was. I would have done
anything for that man.

“Commissioner,” I said, on the night following the affair with the
bullies, but he interrupted me--“My name is Hanafin.” This was merely
one out of many instances in which he tried to set me at my ease.

“You called yourself to-day the representative of the Queen,” I went
on. “An old man, who found me when Redpath put me away to starve off
the coast of Gull, sang ‘God save the Queen.’ Who is this Queen?”

I thought Hanafin was about to laugh, then he went grave.

“Is it possible?” I heard him murmur, before he said profoundly, “Boy!
you have been buried!”

“I have lived at Yellow Sands since my babyhood,” I said.

“Of course,” said he, “you could not know. But you are an Englishman,
and that makes your question sound more than ever strange to my English
ears. Well, listen! I’ll tell you something about our Empress and her
Empire.”

He proceeded to give me a startling description of the world, of its
rulers, its politics, and its universal unrest--a description which
caused my mind to expand, if not to respond, and my brain whirled when
I walked home.

MacCaskill I mention to say that we were partners only in name--that is
to say, we still lived together, Akshelah cooking for us and minding
us; but that was all. We were separated in work and in recreation. It
was my pleasure to watch the life and activity of the ever-growing
population of the city, but always at a distance. MacCaskill loved
life, too, but he liked to be a part of it, and it was the life of
the saloon and the gambling-den that he loved. The factor ran against
congenial spirits, who had knocked about the world; they suited him
better than the ignorant youth who, though born inside the world, had
been bred and brought up upon the outside.

We came to the beginning of September, when the population of Hanafin
City, the wind-crossed defile of the former month, was over five
thousand souls. One night I was teaching Akshelah to read, and proud
indeed to find myself in the position of schoolmaster, when a message
summoned me to the chief.

Hanafin was pushing himself to and fro in a rocking-chair beside his
table--luxuries which had just reached the city--and Carey stood
beside him. I imagined that something must have gone wrong, for the
Commissioner’s face was angry.

“Petrie,” he said at once, “have you heard anything of Redpath?”

When I had replied in the negative Hanafin mused for a few moments,
watching me, then said:

“Father Lacombe has arrived in the city.”

I gave a great start, and Hanafin went on:

“Father Lacombe is a noted missionary. He could hardly find the leisure
to come here, and if he had been thinking of doing so I should have
heard. It certainly is possible for him to have come from Three Points
by river and portage, then by lake, and so over the flats; but in
that case the patrol would have seen him and reported. Repeat your
statement, Carey.”

“It is said that the priest was paddled along the shore by Indians, who
also packed his things on from the beach. No one saw him on the route.
He arrived yesterday, and has a tent in West Hanafin; but he has not
been seen to-day. I am told he is unwell after his journey. The Indians
declare he is Father Lacombe, of Three Points--”

“Their word goes for nothing. Because I have not succeeded in finding
Redpath’s hiding-place, he has come out into the open again, and defies
me. I’ll teach him his last lesson to-night.”

Hanafin pulled his fur-lined cloak about him with angry movements, and
we three left headquarters, and made towards the western annex.

“Redpath would never have taken that name,” I began, when Hanafin, who
was decidedly out of temper, took me up sharply.

“If it had been Father Jones, or Father Anybody, I might have suspected
nothing. The blind is obvious. Redpath knows he has me to deal with. He
thinks he will be safe under the name which I must regard as the most
unlikely for him to select.”

We came up and saw the solitary tent, glowing with a light inside.
Outside an Indian was chopping wood. We were quite away from the noise
and rush of Front Street. A big shadow was moving inside the tent.
It stopped, and suddenly settled down to half its former height. The
Commissioner went to the Indian, and summarily dismissed him on some
mission. Then he and I approached the tent-flap, and Carey followed. I
whispered:

“Shall we cut the ropes?”

“I mark my game before I shoot,” said Hanafin, and he put out his hand
to the tent-flap.

Then I noticed that this was one of the tents made with a window--that
is, a detachable piece of canvas about five feet above ground, which
could be lowered to enable the occupant to see out; the hole was
covered with a piece of fine gauze to keep out the mosquitos. I drew my
companion’s attention to this, and we went up silently, and together
looked into the tent.

The priest was upon his knees, his face buried in his hands.

Hanafin’s face seemed to tighten, and his lips twitched.

A lamp hung from the tent-pole. The priest knelt before a box, upon
which were arranged a few books, and in the centre a curious device of
wood and ivory.

“What is that?” I whispered.

“They call it a crucifix,” came the answer, which told me nothing.

We expected to see the face of a villain, the loose face and flabby
skin, the cold eyes and the smooth smile of Redpath. It was a firm face
that we saw when the head came up and the hands lowered and clasped
each other, a kind, even a noble face; and the eyes, when they opened,
were deep and grey. It was a face that I could have gazed at for a
long time, because I had seen nothing like it before, but Hanafin was
pulling my arm.

“Come away,” he whispered hoarsely.

I watched lingeringly, and the priest, raising his right hand, touched
his wide forehead, and then traced his long fingers down and across his
chest. My untaught mind awoke and responded to the act, and began to
seek in its ignorance for more knowledge.

The strong-minded Commissioner was positively trembling.

“Heaven be thanked that I did not cut those ropes! My reputation would
have gone for ever.”

“Who is he?” I said, the glamour of the scene impressed upon my
struggling mind.

“He is the Reverend Gabriel Lacombe, who, I believe, could be a
cardinal if he chose, but who prefers to serve in the solitude
reclaiming Indians. The great Lacombe, who has refused an
archbishopric! And I was going to jump upon him for a murderer! Carey,
not a word, if you desire mentioning!”




VI

THE NIGHT




CAN A LEOPARD CHANGE HIS SPOTS?


Upon the 19th of September, Akshelah came in from her own little hut
behind my shanty. Her cheeks were a wonderful ripe colour. She looked
at me with large, sad eyes, and softly announced:

“She has come!”

I had already felt the exhilaration of the atmosphere, and I had been
conscious of the raw, strong light, though I could not see outside,
so I knew that the change had come. I did not put any question to
Akshelah, but I must have looked it with my eyes.

She replied simply, “Mispoor,” and I went out.

Mispoor, the lovely cold goddess, had indeed come to us in the night,
and all the country glared and shivered. The mountain ranges looked to
have moved and come closer. Hanafin City was shrouded, and all things
had increased in size. The water along the defile was the colour of
indigo. The smoke hung in the stagnant air like thick lumps of wool.
Here was Pepooa, and the night was upon us.

“We cannot go away now,” said a plaintive voice behind.

Akshelah was right. We could not go away while the night lasted. The
prison bars were closing round us; the light went out fast; we were two
occupants of the gilded prison called Bonanza, and we could not escape
until the time of May, when the Spirit of the Green Mantles should tear
open the waterways, and melt apart the bars of ice.

I went inside my shanty, and desolation and loneliness fell and settled
over me. In all that busy cosmopolitan mining town I was alone. I was
friendless and forsaken.

MacCaskill had left me. We had drifted apart gradually, because I would
not join him in the saloon or at the faro table; he had bought a tent,
and pitched it in Bonanza upon his claim, and there made merry with his
new friends. Wealth had poured in upon him like the riches of an old
tale. His claim had turned out to be the Eldorado hole of old Fagge.
Hanafin and Redpath had each made the pardonable mistake of thinking
that the treasure would be found immediately below the forks. Probably
Leblanc had known that it was five hundred feet lower down, but Justice
had overtaken him before he could make use of his ill-bought knowledge.
MacCaskill was the lucky man, the drawer of the highest prize in this
gigantic lottery. He had achieved the height of his ambition; he had
found the gold which should satisfy all the cravings of avarice. Apart
from his finds of the stone, he would frequently wash out over one
hundred and fifty dollars in dirt alone per day.

At one time I thought that he must be gathering in his fortune
fast--that fortune with which he hoped to retire to luxury in New York
City, but I found myself in error. How did he spend his wealth? The
city prices were not exorbitant. Flour cost nine dollars, fat bacon
twenty-five, sugar seventeen for fifty pounds, beans ten dollars per
bushel, and a pound of tea could be bought for two dollars.

But on a certain night MacCaskill made me enter the largest of the
saloons upon Front Street. One half of the place was devoted to
drinking, the other half to gambling.

My companion soon left me to join a gang, and I grew tired of waiting
for him and came away.

Later I met Lennie, who was slipping downwards fast.

“Say!” he exclaimed, with unwonted eagerness but customary insobriety,
“your ole pard Mac’s ben havin’ quite a bad streak. Heard of it?”

When I had replied, Lennie proceeded:

“He started out to run the faro bank dry, did Mac, an’ he’s ben cleared
out of fourteen thousand dollars. Come and liquor.”

I refused, and walked away, Lennie jeering after me taunts of pride,
because it was a bad breach of etiquette to refuse to drink. I was
making myself unpopular that way, but I simply could not swallow the
smoky, scorching spirit. Only a few minutes later I met MacCaskill,
surrounded by a gang of half-drunken miners; he was himself half drunk,
more with the madness of gambling than with liquor, and was swearing
furiously that he had not finished with that faro bank.

“Wait till I lift a few more thousands outer my hole. I’ll bust it!” he
shouted.

The gang passed on, MacCaskill not more than a yard from me; but
already a great gulf spread between us. He had been changed by coming
into Bonanza; I had remained the same.

Father Lacombe had gone. He had only spent a fortnight in Hanafin City.
I was presented to him, and proclaimed my utter ignorance at once,
because, not knowing how to address him, I asked the natural question
whether he had come to mine.

“Yes,” he replied, his grey eyes lighting. “It is my idea to stake out
and record the entire district.”

He asked me into his tent, and both then and on several subsequent
occasions, because he was a man who never seemed to want sleep,
unfolded to me another world, even more mysterious than the inside and
outside worlds I already had knowledge of. When he had gone, another
blank was made; but he sent a priest to form a mission, and this Father
Casey came for me, and continued my education where his superior had
left off. He was planning to erect a church in Hanafin City, and I had
promised him five thousand dollars from my own rich finds.

Hanafin had gone. That was the saddest loss of all. He had been
recalled by Government to make his report upon the new district, and
on the 10th of September I had wrung his hand and said good-bye, and
then turned away from the handsome aristocratic Englishman, who had
deigned to be my friend, weary at heart, because I knew that I should
never see him again. He would go home and marry his beautiful English
sweetheart, and find the place that had been appointed for him. The
Athabasca Mining Syndicate, Limited, paid good dividends, he had
assured me, and later on I heard that he had made an assignment of the
claim for a high figure. He had done very well, and I feel sure he
deserved all his success. So on that morning when the snow came, which
would not begin to melt until the following late April, I broke down
under the realisation of my loneliness. Two men had declared themselves
my partner--one an unprincipled rascal, who had always held a complete
influence over me; the other as true as steel, and as weak as sand;
both had deceived and forsaken me. I was alone, and yet--

An arm went round my neck, and a flushed face looked down on mine.

“You have lost your friends,” said a sad little voice. “But all the
time I have had only you.”

And had it not been for her, should I have ever seen Bonanza?

I took Akshelah’s hand, and she sat beside me, and there we remained in
silence, with the snow around us, and the ice coming up.

“I should not have come away, but he persuaded me. My father advised me
to stay--with you. But I wanted to see what life was.”

“Ah, and you have seen it,” said Akshelah. Then, after a pause: “Do you
like it?”

“I hate it.”

“And the women of the world--do you like them?”

I have referred to the women who had entered Hanafin City. Their
numbers had grown of late; women wonderfully dressed in bright colours,
with faces of careless strength and boldness, with cold eyes and
mechanically laughing mouths. “Fine women,” MacCaskill had dubbed
them. I thought of them when Akshelah spoke, and I looked at her large
bright eyes, her delicate colouring, her soft fawn skin, her wealth of
rich black hair. I mentally compared this maid of the outside with the
women of the inside. So, I thought, would the great City of London, my
birthplace inside the world, compare with my little home outside.

“Do you like the women?” Akshelah was asking again, and I answered her
truly, and she was satisfied.

The day soon darkened, and the pale snow became ghastly when the arch
of the aurora lit, and the livid spears lengthened and shortened
across a clear black sky. The atmosphere lowered and tightened its
hold upon us, as the grim frost began to assert its long rule, and the
thermometer went down, far below zero, and still down. The close season
had come.

I had five thousand dollars for Father Casey in the currency of the
country, having made the exchange at the bank that morning. The money
was fastened up into a little bundle, which I had left lying ready
to hand, because there was little fear of anything being stolen in
this mining town. Akshelah had gone out, and I was sitting alone in
the lantern light, beside my cook-stove, when the fall of footsteps
crunched the snow; a hand felt across the piece of canvas which did
duty for a door; there was the sound of quick breathing; the flap gave
way, and a well-known voice spoke familiarly:

“Good evening, Petrie!”

A terrible apparition introduced itself into my shanty. A tall figure,
abnormally thin, with unspeakable rags clinging about it; an emaciated
face, where two great cheek-bones protruded as though they must burst
the skin; two pouches of bloodless flesh represented cheeks; two cold,
deeply-sunken eyes; two large loose ears; a little grey hair, and a
neck that had dwindled down to the dimensions of a stove-pipe. This was
the Redpath who advanced to bend greedily over my glowing stove.

“An inclement night, my dear fellow. Really miserably cold and
cheerless. Well, and how are you? Of course, I ought to have visited
you long ago; but you know, perhaps, how peculiarly I have been
situated. An incident of a painful nature has compelled me to retire
into temporary seclusion. Even now I have to exercise supreme caution.
Ah, excuse my clothes, Petrie. Anything goes in a mining camp, you
know.”

The same as yesterday!

The living skeleton reached out a hand which made me shiver, and closed
it upon my pipe. He looked round.

“I don’t see your tobacco. Ah, thanks.” He began to fill my pipe, but I
noticed that it was only with the utmost difficulty he could maintain
an upright position. “Well, and how are things? Going smoothly, eh?
Confounded nuisance my being knocked out of it for the time. Excuse
plain speaking, Petrie, but I really think you might have done a
little more for me. I know it’s _sauve qui peut_ in gold-mining, as in
most other things, and shove the hindmost to the devil. You needn’t
remind me. Ah, well, bygones must be bygones. I thought I’d just trot
round, look you up, and have a bit of supper with you, old man, to
show there’s no ill-feeling on my part; but I daresay, with my usual
inaccuracy, I’ve dropped in at the wrong time, and you’ve done your
bite.”

He could talk in that strain though he was fainting, and absolutely
starved. He began to sway to and fro, and sometimes groped blindly. I
could not bear to look at him.

“I never expected to see you again,” I said.

“You thought Hanafin had driven me away?” Redpath spoke with the
greatest difficulty, and the bony hand that clutched my still unlighted
pipe shook in a horrid fashion. “I have been in hiding a few miles
from Bonanza, awaiting my opportunity. It has been decidedly lonesome
and, of course, annoying, because I have been compelled to furnish
myself with supplies. I think you said that you have had your supper?
Hanafin has gone, I hear. He could not find me, after all. He was
wasted here ... admirable tactician ... clever in finesse ... sees
the board with his mind ... always sure of his next move, anticipates
yours.... You move one way--check ... you move another way--check ...
then checkmate; down comes your number, and the lights go out Ah, God!
What an earthquake!”

The unhappy wretch reeled about in an agony, stumbled against the
stove, and cried like an animal when he felt his leg scorched. It was
horrible to watch him being tortured, but with all his pride striving
to conceal it.

I pushed him down upon a log of wood, and as quickly as I could put
some food before his half-blind eyes, and gave him some hot whisky in a
tin mug. It was marvellous how rapidly the food and drink acted. In a
very short time Redpath was his cynical self again, and I noticed that
he had the sense and the self-restraint to eat sparingly.

“I most sincerely beg your pardon,” he said with dignity. “It is
altogether inexcusable to enter a man’s house and straightway make a
scene before him. It is most unpardonable and ridiculous. The fact is,
I breakfasted very early, found myself too busy to take luncheon, and
this keen winter’s air acts suddenly upon an empty stomach and such a
weak constitution as mine. You see, Petrie, we sometimes over-estimate
our strength. We forget we are getting on in years.”

Then he again took up my pipe, lighted it, and smoked heartily. What
was I to do with this man, who appeared to think that I had wronged him?

“It is not safe for you to be here,” I said. “Why don’t you go away?”

“That is impossible now that the winter has come,” said Redpath, as
though pitying my ignorance. “Besides, this place has attractions for
me. It has been the object of my life to attain. I have played my hand
very badly, and must now suffer the consequences. I shall not go.
Indeed, my finances happen to be too shaky to permit me to travel.
There is plenty to be picked up about here.”

“Honestly?” I inquired.

His eyebrows went up.

“Spare me bathos,” he said entreatingly.

“Where is Olaffson?”

The expression on the human skeleton’s face altered.

“Ah, you may congratulate me there! He has gone, and, I trust, for
ever. I can feel myself a free man now. Olaffson has really gone, and
my malediction goes with him and after him.”

“Hadn’t you better go?” I suggested, following the train of thought.
“If you are found in my shanty--”

“Ah, yes, I understand! Your skill in touching upon these delicate
matters is very remarkable, Petrie. Why mince the matter? Let us say
boldly that the law, as administered here so admirably, would exact a
penalty from you were I to be discovered under your hospitable roof.”
He poured himself out some more whisky. “Here is your very excellent
health. All that you can possibly wish me do I wish you.”

He drank slowly, his eyes half shut.

“Good-night!” I said coldly.

“You good fellow!” said Redpath warmly, clasping my hand in his cold,
bony grip. With his spare hand, I noticed, he was gathering up the
scraps of food he had left, and stuffing the same somewhere among his
rags. “With your never-failing good heart, you speed your parting guest
Good-night, dear old boy! I’m coming round again very shortly, as I
have a suggestion to lay before you. Make both our fortunes in a very
little time. Good-night. Don’t come with me. I must slip along the back
of the street, and ’ware soldiers.”

He went, my pipe in his mouth, and my plug of tobacco in his hand.
Devoutly I hoped that I had seen the last of him.

I had promised to visit Father Casey that same night, to leave with him
my little donation. I put on my hat, coat, and overshoes, and looked
for my tiny bundle of money--that five thousand dollars.

Will it be believed that I looked in vain?




THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED


There were no October leaves to fall upon Hanafin City; the ragged
spruce held its dark greenery, which looked black under the snow and
glaze of ice, but all else was dead; not a bird flew, not an insect
trumpeted, nothing marked the carpet of the covered cliffs. Where had
the countless millions of mosquitos gone? Where the sable ravens, and
the loons and divers? Nothing would be alive again until April. It was
the time of the great silence.

Beginning at an hour before noon, and continuing until three, a
glimmering of raw light visited us, a pale unhealthy ghost-light,
without sun, and all the rest was night. Not darkness, because the
aurora rose and set, and sometimes the uneven arch was white and
brilliant; but generally it was smoky, and sometimes pale-blue and
livid, and sometimes it was red and terrible. There it hung, swaying
over us mysteriously, loaded with electricity, shivering, darting,
whispering, and influencing our lives and movements by its moods.
Everything was frozen. The temperature of eighty or ninety degrees
of cold kept us working for warmth, and to rid ourselves of the
superfluous electricity which that magnetic land poured into our bodies.

It was the close season for placer-mining, and there was only one
thing we could do, namely, to drift out our pay streaks by burning. All
the miners of Bonanza were thawing the frozen ground with fire, and
they told me that this method of winter-mining had never been attempted
before. First we cut away the moss and surface accumulations until
solid ground was reached. In the hole thus made we would build a fire,
and when this had died down we would throw out the ashes, and as much
of the ground as had been thawed out, make another fire, and repeat
the process, until we had burnt our way down to bed-rock. We would
then build our fires against the bank of the hole, and drift sideways,
moving perhaps one foot of pay-dirt each day. The dirt thus brought
out we would dump in piles, to be left until spring, when water could
be obtained to wash out the pay. I mention this to show how we passed
the winter in Bonanza. Everywhere these fires were burning, and all
day the smoke hung or drifted very slowly, in thick sheets like vast
overhanging masses of wool.

My claim had not proved so rich as the one I had vacated, and yet
it was impressed upon me that I had done very well. I had taken out
altogether some eight thousand dollars, the bulk of which had been
stolen by Redpath, and the greater part of what remained would be
swallowed up in buying supplies during the winter. None of the men from
the _Carillon_ had done any good, and Jim Morrison was a loafer about
the city. Jake Peterssen, with many another, made a very substantial
grub stake. MacCaskill was the one lucky man, who had struck a
“world-beater,” but his wealth benefited only the saloon proprietors
upon Front Street.

It was a day in November, when, after buying some tea and sugar at
the store of the Bonanza Trading and Supply Association, during the
short period of the glimmer, I became attracted by a notice suspended
over the big stove. A knot of men were discussing the same loudly and
angrily. I could read anything by that time, so I went up; and this is
what I read:--

  “The Citizens of Hanafin City are warned that there is a bad gang of
  sneak-thieves around the place. Quite a few things, such as grub and
  tools, have been missed around Bonanza. Old Man Septimus M‘Quatrain
  had a fur cap and coat lifted out of his tent right on his claim,
  Number Twenty-three Petrie Gulch. Bill Petro had a bag of dirt and
  twenty pounds of bacon cycloned away from his dug-out. These are
  just examples of what has been going on. The Citizens are requested
  to keep their eyes skinned; and if any of them think they are upon a
  good track, they will be doing the right thing to themselves and this
  City if they communicate right off with the undersigned, or any of
  the City councillors.

                                                    “ALEC. MACINNES,
                                                 “Mayor of Hanafin City.

  “P.S.--Mind that bundle of money lifted off Rupe Petrie.”

The days crept on to the end of the month, and the thefts went on,
too, while the public anger became hotter, and excitement fired the
entire city. There are crimes worse than murder in the eyes of miners:
such crimes as tampering with another man’s claim in the close season,
taking a neighbour’s lawful water; but above all, opening and rifling
an associate’s cache, the special act of guilt for which pardon can
never be given. When any man is sentenced of robbing a cache, let that
man be condemned!

One miner assured me that in the course of a long life spent about the
gold-mines of the world, only two cases of this extreme guilt had ever
come within his knowledge. The miner trusts his associates implicitly.
Before going away, he will store his supplies, his tools, and his tent
inside a cave, or in some hole, set his name upon the outside and his
mind at rest, because he knows that no miner will touch his cache or
its contents, however hard put to it he may be for supplies. The rascal
who would rob a church will not touch a cache.

There were three quaint old men of Hanafin City, all as like each other
as it was possible for men to be, named respectively Rod, Abe, and
Pal, close friends, but not related. These men had come in during the
beginning of August with a quantity of supplies, and had gone out about
the middle of September, before the coming of the ice, after they had
stored their possessions in a cache upon the partnership claim, which
was 1,000 feet in length, and rectangular in form, going up the hill
from the Akshelah. They were fine old gentlemen, very popular, true
miners, who understood the science of their profession thoroughly. They
went out to escape the night, with the idea of returning to work their
claim in the spring.

Upon the 27th of November, at twenty minutes past six by the clock in
the Record Office, a patrol rode into Hanafin, horse and rider white
with frost, and a few minutes later a report passed feverishly about
the city that the cache of the three old men had been tampered with.
The deep-toned threatenings of the infuriated citizens had hardly
broken out when Moccasin Bill appeared upon Front Street, his grizzled
beard heavy with ice, and his preternaturally grave face sterner
even than usual. He stood upon the street, in front of the principal
drinking and gambling saloon, and called in his high nasal tones:

“Boys all! I’ve jest come right from old men’s cache. I’ve ben burnin’
on me new claim alongside.”

The miners came about him in the weird night under the aurora. The snow
wore a greenish hue, and the frost crystals danced in the firelike
atmosphere as so many electric sparks. I could see the lumps of ice
upon Bill’s beard knocking together when his head moved. A shout went
up from the saloon, and the men came forth like hornets out of their
nest, smoking, swearing, shouting, among them MacCaskill, his big
face scarlet, his tongue noisy, his hands full of money, because the
interruption had drawn him from the furious excitement of the faro
table. The crowd surged up and around Moccasin Bill.

“Boys all! old men’s cache has ben pulled inter pieces. Everything’s
ben took. This city uv our Queen has ben disgraced--”

I could see his lips still moving, but what more he said was lost in
the mad shoutings of all Hanafin. These men were terrible. Their faces
were like those one half sees passing in a bad dream. Their cigars had
dropped, and I could see the red points blinking upon the green snow.
The electric light of the sky flashed and hissed over their heads and
all their insanity. At last Moccasin Bill was heard again.

“I’ve ben around. Them things were took to-day. There’s tracks en the
snow--”

There he was stopped. A yelling went up on every side, and the men ran
together, apparently in confusion, but all with an object--to prepare
themselves for a journey. A thousand men made for the silent canyon, a
thousand men poured through what once had been Mosquito Hole, and that
thousand men swept over the snow and the hidden treasures of Bonanza.
So the hunt began. The pursuers were men, and their quarry men. They
were more terrible than dogs, these hunters, because men can call off
the dogs of chase. But who can call off men?

“Say!” A hand pulled my arm, and a frightened voice exclaimed: “The
Commissioner’s away!”

It was Dave, late of the _Carillon_.

“Don’t ye see?” he went on fearfully. “The boys are so mad there’ll
be no holdin’ of ’em. The Commissioner’s gone around the country, an’
won’t be back before the week-end. The boys’ll jest take the law inter
their own hands.”

“What will they do if they catch the thieves?” I could hardly speak
with fear, because I was sure I could name one of the marauders.

“They’ll flog ’em sure. They’ll hang ’em. They’re so ter’ble mad,
p’r’aps they’ll put ’em on the wood-pile.”

I shuddered dreadfully. The frost choked my breath when I tried to
protest against the horror of burning fellow-men.

“The police will stop it,” I managed to say.

“The police’ll make the boys give ’em over to the law, if so be they’re
strong enough. But there’s only fifty of ’em in Hanafin, now the
Commissioner’s gone wi’ his crowd.”

A quiet settled over the city, perhaps because it felt a tragedy
impending, perhaps because the noisiest fifth part of its inhabitants
were hunting in the night over Bonanza. I did not sleep during the
hours which are considered night in the other world. Sometimes I looked
out fearfully along silent Front Street, which spread away under the
pale green glow, the lights from the saloons flashing on the near side,
and upon the far side, from the Variety Theatre, came fitfully a burst
of harsh music or a yell of drunken applause. One or two huge huskies
moved slowly about the snow like hungry bears.

The hours of business returned, but the hunters were not among us. The
glimmer of hopeless daylight reached us, and the miners went out into
Bonanza to watch and wait for the hounds, but there was no burning
done. There were no signs of the thousand who had gone forth to hunt,
beyond their innumerable tracks in the snow.

“They’ll be ter’ble cold an’ hungry,” said some.

Then an old man, who knew all the moods of the arctic winter, put up
his hand at noon, and pointed north.

“There’s wind a-comin’ there,” he said. “If they ain’t back afore
night, we won’t see half of ’em no more.”

I saw the scar of misty cloud he indicated rising out of the northern
snows, a long thin patch, the colour of indigo, and as it ascended all
our dim, sad light went out.

Only a few citizens knew that a posse of police had set forth during
the night, so soon as the hunters had gone out, and no one could know
which direction they had taken, because it is the habit of these men
to ride back upon their tracks, and jump their horses to some patch of
ground which the wind has swept clean of snow, and so ride away and
baffle pursuit. The few who knew guessed that they had gone to bring
the Commissioner. They would have to ride against time, and the act of
God.

The _Hanafin Herald_, our daily paper, did not appear, not for the lack
of news that day, but because the men who prepared it were out upon the
chase.

By two o’clock daylight was done; at three, no news; about four, the
aurora came up like dark-blue smoke, and the atmosphere was entirely
without motion; five, the silence was still unbroken, the air so still
that it would never have supported a feather; at ten minutes past, the
snow-dust along Front Street began to whirl in small eddies. It was a
fantastic sight, and the man who was weather-wise chewed his cigar-end
fiercely.

“It’s a-goin’ to be an old-time night,” he said simply.

Six o’clock, and the murmur of many voices filled the city. The hunters
were returning from Bonanza. The atmosphere was filled with a stream
of liquid ice, and the noise of feet tramping upon snow. The dark-blue
aurora was growing purple, and a dreadful darkness settled down, like
something tangible and creeping.

Out of the closeness of that gloom the procession entered Hanafin City.
First came a sweeping van of misty ghosts, whirling along side by side,
formed by columns of ice-cold snow-dust, whipped up into the atmosphere
by some northern current sent as a forerunner of the great wind; then
those who had gone forth to watch and wait; after these, the hunters
and the hunted.




WHEN SENTENCE IS GIVEN, LET HIM BE CONDEMNED


Some of the hunters carried packs, silent witnesses brought to appear
against the hunted; and at the end of the procession eight men
staggered, four of them leaning to one side, and four to the other.
Before these had advanced into the open, a cyclonic spout of wind swept
over the northern cliffs, rushed down, and broke upon us. The torrent
swept and roared through Hanafin, so that none of us could determine
the nature of the burden that the eight men carried.

Then the night became terrible. One man might stand holding another,
yet neither would be able to see the other; the snow-dust choked the
wind and lashed upon our faces with cold ice-pricks; above us, around,
and below the grey sea of wind and snow roared, and rushed, and smote.

A great crowd had massed in Front Street, surging to and fro, jostling
and pushing, but each separate individual in that crowd could feel
himself alone in that arctic tempest. The voices were heard no longer,
because in her insanity Nature can roar louder than a million madmen.
Now and again a light goggled out of the grey whirl, to disappear in
an instant.

That crowd drifted towards the doors of the big saloon, and I was
carried with them, my face smarting under the lash of ice. Already the
great hall appeared choked, and yet I believe hundreds were packed
in after I tumbled inside. The space used for dancing was a sea of
humanity, and, like the sea, it roared and heaved; the gambling-tables
had been folded up and set aside; the bar was thronged. Still the
men came, with here and there a woman who had long ago abandoned
self-respect, and the passion of the assembly became greater. Everyone
was wildly shouting, and I could gather nothing from the tumult.

A great voice sounded over us, and this voice rolled from end to end in
the order, “Quit yer noise!”

A silence fell into the crowd, but outside the arctic storm went
yelling on its way.

A chair had been placed upon the bar counter, and on this chair
Moccasin Bill seated his spare figure. To his right stood MacInnes, the
mayor; to his left the man who had become a stranger to me, my former
partner MacCaskill. These three looked down upon us.

“Shet the doors,” commanded Moccasin Bill, “an’ keep ’em shet. The rest
uv the citizens must get away home, ’cause there ain’t room for ’em en
here. Make a space right there.”

He pointed down, and the sea of men heaved back, until I found it hard
to draw breath.

Grizzled Bill rose solemnly.

“Citizens,” he proclaimed, pulling off his fur cap and holding it out,
“ye know as well as me that we’re on British territory, where the law
ain’t jest what it is en minin’ towns over the line. Ther’ the miners
make their own law, an’ pays out their own justice. Right here the law
is the law uv the country, an’ ’tis administered by the judge uv the
Court. I ain’t for sayin’ anything ’gainst that. We ain’t all British
be any manner uv means, but while we’re en Hanafin City we’re subjects
o’ Queen Victoria. Citizens, I say this is a case where we’re entitled
to take the law inter our own hands.”

The voices answered him with a great shout of approval.

“I’ve ben appointed judge,” went on the old man solemnly. “An’ me
bowers are the mayor uv this city an’ Factor MacCaskill, the first
miner inter Bonanza. I’ve ben judge afore this, boys, an’ I’ve jedged
fair, I’ve ben told, and, ’fore God, I’ll judge fair again.”

The old man bent forward, and peered over the upturned faces rising and
falling beneath.

“Bring up that prisoner!” he called, and the crowd swayed to and fro,
and my heart began to thud.

I heard the voice of the judge asking, “Where’s the other pris’ner?”

Every word of the answer reached my ears.

“Out in the snow, judge. He’ll thaw inside.”

“What’s that?” I asked the man who was jammed upon me.

“Guess t’other pris’ner’s ben froze,” he gasped back.

“Burn him! Burn him!” was the cry going up around the building. If the
man had been frost-bitten, let him be thawed with fire. “Burn him!”

“Order!” shouted the mayor.

The prisoner stood before his judge. I craned my neck, but I could not
see. I was fastened into the crowd like a cork in a bottle.

“Who is he?” I called, because Redpath was tall, and this man surely
was short, or I should have seen him.

“’Tis a little man,” spoke a very tall miner generally, “wi’ a face
like lumps o’ wet dough.”

Olaffson, the Icelander, for the last time.

“He’s sweatin’ an’ skulkin’ something horrid,” said the tall miner.

“Pris’ner!” spoke the grizzled judge, and the entire assembly tried to
push forward. “Ther’ has ben a lot uv sneak-thievin’ about this city
an’ around Bonanza. You was took right among a lot uv stolen property.
There’s jest one case we want to try special, an’ that’s the robbin’
uv the cache what belongs to ole men, Rod, Abe, an’ Pal, who’ve gone
out for the winter. We didn’t find none o’ that stuff in your dug-out,
nor yet in yer pard’s. We surmise you’ve hid it away some place. If you
speak up, an’ show grit, we’ll take that into consideration when we
come to pass sentence. Are ye guilty, or are ye not guilty?”

The pause which followed was not silence, because the wind screamed and
the snow hissed where it struck. Surely the prisoner upon the other
side of the door would be frozen to death, and his guards with him.

A voice proclaimed, “Says he’s not guilty.”

The crowd broke into furious shouts, “Flog him! Flog him!”

“Quit yer noise!” the judge ordered angrily. “This is a court uv
justice.”

He spoke to MacInnes, and the latter held up a big coon coat.

“’Twas found in the pris’ner’s dug-out,” explained the mayor. “Does any
citizen claim it?”

“That’s mine,” shouted the coarse voice of old miner Septimus
M‘Quatrain. “The durned thief! Likewise an otter cap.”

“Here ’tis,” said MacInnes. He then put up twenty pounds of very fat
bacon.

Bill Petro shouted:

“Lemme smell a hunk, an’ I’ll tell. I spilt me oil-can over me bacon.”

The mayor sniffed gravely.

“Ay, it smells of coal oil all right, Bill,” he said.

Not a laugh went up from the crowd. Only the same angry mutterings and
the deep growls, “Flog him!”

“You’ve pleaded not guilty, pris’ner,” said the judge. “Them things
were found en yer dug-out. What have ye got to say en yer defence?”

The men near the inaudible wretch repeated his frightened answer, and
it was passed on through the crowd.

“Says he never took ’em. Says he knows who did. Says his pard done it
all.”

“Pris’ner,” exclaimed the judge with sudden heat, “ye are the meanest
skunk what ever trod!”

The citizens broke loose again.

“Wood-pile, jedge! Say wood-pile!” and under it all the monotonous
antiphon, “Flog him!”

Above the tumult of those demands, and the insanity of the elements, a
bull-like bellow roared, and an arm, like a black tree, shot up--the
black arm which I had once broken at Gull.

“Jake Peterssen for the floggin’!” yelled the half-mad crowd, and
refused to be quieted.

The judge was talking with MacCaskill, and so soon as he could make his
voice heard, called to know if I were present. Directly I had answered,
the negro shouted:

“He’s a better man than me, jedge. He beat me. He’s the boy ye want.
Rupe Petrie fo’ the floggin’!”

The miners took up the cry and yelled it, until I could already hear
Olaffson’s vile screams for mercy, and the horrid shock of a heavy
whip. When he was allowed to speak, the judge recounted the charges
brought by the factor against the prisoner--the burning of my home, the
treachery at Gull upon the lake, and at Hanafin; and I had to answer
that the story was all true.

“Bring in his pard,” the voices were demanding.

The judge spoke grimly to the Icelander.

“Ye are a mean, skulkin’ louse, pris’ner, an’ we don’t have to show
ye no pity, though I allow we ain’t got nothing ’cept what they call
circumstantial evidence ’gainst ye. Jest ye tell me if ther’ is any
sort uv reason why we should show mercy to ye.”

“He’s sweatin’ awful,” said the tall miner.

Olaffson had only his former story. His partner had been the thief.

The voices went up strongly:

“Fetch in his pard.”

Moccasin Bill almost smiled.

“Fetch in his pard,” he repeated terribly.

The doors were open, and in fought the rush of snow and wind, and the
lamp flames leapt wildly. There was a sound of struggling, of lifting,
and of carrying. The doors were shut again, and I knew that Redpath
was amongst us, the cynical, opinionative English gentleman, the man
who had made such a miserable failure of that space between coming and
going called life. Redpath for the last time.

He had come to my home at Yellow Sands, like a thief in the night; he
had come to mock at my misery in the old stone ruin of the bush, where
he hoped to steal away my life; he had come half a skeleton to be fed,
and, after taking my hospitality, had robbed me and gone. As he entered
then, what was the influence of that superior smile, what the use of
that gentlemanly manner, and what the power of that contemptuous glance?

He had always been fond of life.

Four men carried a long shape, swathed in a snow-covered blanket. They
proceeded to unwrap this shape. It was like unrolling a sheet of lead,
because the cruel frost had made the thick duffle rigid and unyielding.
The blanket came away gradually, and revealed the man, frozen body and
blood and bones. The flesh frozen into ridges, was as solid to the
touch as stone, and colder far. They had brought me forward to identify
the frozen man.

“His name was Redpath,” I said. “He was my father’s enemy, and I know
he was a thief.”

“The corpse is guilty,” said the judge, and a whisper of assent hurried
round the building.

I could still find that old superior smile upon Redpath’s face. It
could not disappear, because it was frozen there, and it seemed to me
to be intended for myself, and for those around, the men who had hunted
him down who now judged and had found him guilty, but who could not
condemn. Through his half-open lips I saw his white even teeth. They
were the only pleasant feature he possessed, and they were false.

The blanket frozen round the frozen man was claimed by one miner;
the clothes he had been frozen in by another; my bundle of money was
discovered in one of the pockets, and returned to me; everything upon
him, from the clothes to a lump of tobacco, had been stolen. The only
thing he had failed to steal was a longer span of the life he loved.

I stood between Olaffson and the dead; the one silent for ever, the
other wringing and cringing in an agony. Still I felt that inexplicable
pity for the Englishman. He had once been friendly with my father; he
had taken the hand of my mother, whom I had never seen; he had held
me as a baby upon his knee. A revulsion of feeling crossed me when
I looked upon Olaffson, and for him I had no pity at all. I heard
the vengeful voices demanding, “Sentence the pris’ner, jedge.” Once
MacCaskill’s glance met mine, and he turned aside with an awkward
movement. Moccasin Bill stood up.

“Ye are guilty, pris’ner,” he said slowly. “I’ve ben around the world
en me time, an’ followed the yeller every place, an’ I’ve seen crooks
an’ blacklegs shot an’ hung--ay, an’ burned--an’ I’ve stood by an’ said
as how they deserved it. But I’ve never known a worse case than this.”
The assenting voices shouted again. “No, boys,” he said, appealing to
his audience, “I’ve never known a worse case than this. Ye have ben
tried fair, pris’ner. We’re on Canadian soil, an’ a Canuk has tried ye.
For I’m Canadian, boys; I’m Canadian to the cuticle. Ye are guilty of
sneak-thievin’, pris’ner. Ye are jest a louse what wants poundin’, an’
we’re a-goin’ to pound ye. The boys want to have ye flogged.”

The voice of the grizzled judge became drowned, and above all the yells
sounded the mighty bull bellow of Jake Peterssen, calling my name, and
invoking my right arm for the punishment of the thief.

“I sentence ye to be flogged,” said the judge. “Fifty lashes--”

Then it seemed to me as though the wind had swept into the building,
and had caught up the assembly, and brought them down upon me like
an overwhelming wave. I heard the screams of Olaffson. They had
seized him, and were dragging him this way and that. My name was upon
everyone’s lips. “Rupe Petrie!” The place howled with it. The wind
caught it up, and whirled it away over all Bonanza. And still the men
were shouting, “Rupe Petrie!”

I understood at length that a tribute had been paid to my strength,
that, partly because the condemned had wronged me, I had been appointed
by the judge public executioner to the city.

I could not--I shouted that I could not--do what was required of me,
but I might as successfully have appealed to the wild wind outside as
to the wilder men about me. The whip was being made; Olaffson, beside
himself with terror, was being stripped; and the scene made me sick
when the entire meaning of my hideous duty confronted me. And all the
time the men shouted with mad tongues, and around were all the demon
faces and the demon eyes. Jake Peterssen snatched my weak hand and
wrung it in congratulation, confident that he had shown himself my
friend.

Another shout went up. The doors were being bombarded with fists and
kicks.

“The boys are spoilin’ to get inside.”

“Open up!” called some of the men.

“There’s no room for ’em!” shouted Moccasin Bill.

The arctic temperature streamed inside; the tempest paused in its
yelling, to draw its icy breath for a fresh outburst. A strong voice,
muffled and angry, demanded admission in the name of the Queen-Empress.

“Open,” said the judge.

Again the stream of wind and ice, and the delirious leaping of the
lights. Figures like white bears pushed inward, their moustaches frozen
up in fine snow, a snow-covered figure at their head, grasping a sword
covered with crystals in his fur mitt--the Commissioner himself; and
behind him his police.

“Draw on them!” the representative shouted, and the white company
brought up their revolvers and covered every part of the building.
Two men at least felt the joy of reprieve--the executioner and the
condemned.

“Hand over that man!” called the Commissioner.

The crowd growled like lions disappointed of their prey. This
Commissioner was a different man from Hanafin. He was bold and hard,
but had no tact, and when he gave an order he would have it instantly
obeyed, though he might accompany it with a curse or an insult.

“Hand him over, or I’ll cancel the certificates of the lot of you.”

“We tried him fair, Commissioner,” entreated Moccasin Bill. “He ain’t
done so much agin her gracious Majesty as agin us boys. He an’ his
pard, who’s froze solid ther’, have ben bad sneak-thieves, an’ we’ve
ben an’ took this case right inter our own hands for this once. You’d
only put him inter prison, but we’re a-goin’ to hang him.”

The City of Hanafin endorsed every word spoken by their own appointed
judge.

The Commissioner simply gave the word of command to his men. Four tall
figures shoved forward, the fine snow falling off their furs.

“Shoot anyone who interferes!” shouted the angry Commissioner.

MacInnes, the mayor, spoke aside to Moccasin Bill.

“Boys!” called the latter, “the law has got to be obeyed. Let the
police have the pris’ner.”

The miners could scarcely obey the order of their own judge, but
the police made the arrest of Olaffson, and marched him out. The
Commissioner wheeled round sharply, with a satisfied smile, and
followed. But while the clouds of snow hissed inwards, the mayor,
standing stiff upon the bar counter, yelled with all his might:

“Boys! To hell with the sneak-thief!”

The men went mad again. Taking up the cry, they rushed into the
whirling night, into the freezing, tearing wind and the grey torrent
of snow, and flung themselves upon the police. Revolvers flashed
uselessly, and swords darted aimlessly, stabbing merely the great grey
shapes that fled down the wind ghost-like. The miners of Hanafin were
drunk with fury, and they were in thousands against a handful. Soldier
after soldier was seized and dragged to the light of the saloon,
that each might be identified. The time came when they found the one
shrieking wretch they wanted....

I fled, battling against the stream of ice, away from the life I had
come from home to see.

Standing beside the stove in my shanty I found poor Akshelah, shivering
with terror. The relief of finding myself alone with her, the delight
of being able to console and assure her! She had told me that I was all
she had. What had I upon earth beside her?

“We have no enemies to follow us now, little squirrel,” I said,
stroking her thick warm hair. “Redpath is frozen into stone, and
Olaffson,” I shivered, because the shrieks of the wind were pitilessly
human.

“The white face!” she said fearfully, coming up to me.

“They are killing him now.”

She shivered, and clung to me more closely. She spoke presently.

“I told you the factor loved the yellow stones.” She was playing
nervously with my cold fingers. “He has left you, and--you have no one
now.”

I lifted her face and kissed her soft mouth with a new feeling which
made me forget everything save the present.

“I have all that I want. And when the storm has done, we will go
together to Father Casey, and tell him”--the wind became terrible, and
I had to wait for it to pass--“that we want to be together all our
lives.”




VII

BONANZA




WHERE THE SUN SHINES UPON THE SAND


It was the beginning of June, and my wife and I had travelled since the
end of April, when the break-up had visited the land somewhat earlier
than usual. It was the season of sound after the silence of winter, the
season which we call Sekwun, or the Spring. The streams were running
among the hills, the wavies were calling overhead, the snow buntings
were whirling past in clouds, and the crocus made the slopes purple;
and we were happy--we were coming home. The long night was done, the
aurora had gone out, and the sun turned everything into gold.

The five awful months filling the interval are black to look upon now.
I had nothing to bind me to the false Bonanza. I had parted with my
claim, not unselfishly, but because I needed it no more.

I had found an old gentleman, another Englishman, and a very frail old
man, who had been ruined by his only son, and who had come into the new
land to try and find a little gold, not so much for the comforting of
his old age as to enable him to pay the profligate’s debts, and so to
clear an honourable name. He had often come to my shanty during the
eternal night, and he was never so happy as when talking about his
unnatural son.

Once, in conversation, he began to narrate how he had followed the
young man after nightfall along the London way which he called
Piccadilly, being anxious to learn in what company the scapegrace spent
his time; but the latter discovered the nearness of his father, and
escaped.

“He eluded me beside the Park,” said the old man, “but I could not be
sure which way he went. However, later that night--”

I interrupted his recollections.

“Is there not an archway of white stone,” I said suddenly, “opening
into a big space where there are trees and walks? Perhaps your son went
under that arch.”

The old gentleman started and stared at me.

“You told me you had passed all your life out here!” he exclaimed.

“My father brought me out from London as a baby,” I said, wondering at
my own late words.

After an interval of silence, the old gentleman spoke, and explained
for me.

“Your nurse would have taken you through the Park every day, I daresay,
and often out at Hyde Park Corner. That is the archway which you
remember. You must have seen it with your baby eyes, and your brain
still retains the impression.”

Another night I ventured to ask him how his claim had worked before the
coming of the close season, and the question made him sad.

“No good,” he said, in his quiet voice. “It is a hill claim, and such
are hard to work. I have found next to nothing.”

Before leaving Hanafin City, I went to the Record Office, paid the fee
of two dollars, and registered an assignment of my grant permitting
me to mine upon Number One MacCaskill. The following day I paid the
required fee of fifteen dollars, and took out a new grant made in
favour of Alexander Pearson, the good old English gentleman, whose only
fault was his too great affection for a worthless son. I sent this
little present by Akshelah, who gave it into his hands, and then came
away, as I had instructed her, and we left Hanafin City at once. I
believe there was a good deal of coarse gold left in that claim. I hope
there was.

On that last night I went to bid farewell to MacCaskill, with whom I
had not spoken since Christmas. He had come out with me as my partner,
and I could not go away without bidding him good-bye. It was not
difficult to find him, but when I came out of the drinking saloon
into the gambling division, and discovered him, I did not carry out
my intention. He was drunk, not with liquor, but with the fever and
passion of gambling, and he was watching the faro cards with the wild
stare of a hungry beast. I did speak to him once, but he took no heed;
I ventured to touch his arm, but he only looked ahead, and howled “Lost
again!” and pulled out more gold. He had not noticed me, and I went
sadly away, to see him no more. I left MacCaskill, the lucky owner of
old Fagge’s gold-hole, to realise his dreams.

“See!” exclaimed happy Akshelah, as our canoe, which I had bought at
Waterhen from one of the Swampy Tribes, brushed lightly along the
smiling shore of our own Lake Whispering.

I looked, and saw upon the slopes that tiny rare red flower which
blooms on a level with the ground, and which refuses to live within
the influence of human passions. It is even true that this flower will
alter its colour, and become blue, if men settle near the spot where it
grows; and if many people collect, and a town or village springs up,
the little plant dies altogether, because it is too ethereal to live
where men breathe, and move, and defile the atmosphere.

I sprang ashore and picked some of the plant, but directly I touched
the bloom it withered in my hands, and Akshelah tried with a like
result. Had we been going out I might have been depressed, but we were
home again, so we laughed and sang aloud with the excellent happiness
that comes so seldom. We paddled on towards the bend in the brimming
lake, because the sun was falling low behind.

Now I was coming to the land of treasure. I had left Yellow Sands to
look for it, and all the time I had it, and by coming away left it
behind. Happy for me that no one had discovered it in my absence! For
the true Bonanza is home, wherever it may be. Some may have that dear
home in the city or country inside, and some in the world outside;
but wherever it is, there the heart turns, like the robin, who leaves
us for the long winter, but flies back in the spring. The canoe swept
round the bend, where the fine shingle murmured with the play of the
emerald water. Before us we saw the sun shining upon the golden sands.

My home had been rebuilt, and I was expected. Antoine was planting
potatoes that evening, and pointed with a grunt to a fresh piece of
garden land, which he had reclaimed from the willows and wood-ants.
Everything was scented and delicious in the magnificent spring. And
below, my own little Yellow Sands ran with its sparkling music.

Such is my dream of the false Bonanza. I am awake again now--awake,
with the old remembered song of the waters beneath, and my bright-eyed
wife at my side. I am satisfied, because I have proved the two worlds,
and tried the men who live in each. I am happy, because I have escaped
from the world which I could never love, because I am surrounded by the
wonderful Nature which is all I ask for.

So I shall never leave my northern home again.


THE END


_Printed by Cowan & Co., Limited, Perth._




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Perceived typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BONANZA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


