The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Vivisectors' Directory
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Vivisectors' Directory

Editor: Benjamin Bryan

Author of introduction, etc.: Frances Power Cobbe

Release date: February 25, 2017 [eBook #54233]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
        images of public domain material from the Google Books
        project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIVISECTORS' DIRECTORY ***

Transcriber’s Note: Each vivisector’s name was given in =bold= in the
original. This is purely for decorative emphasis, and the = signs may
safely be removed if the reader finds them distracting.





                                   THE
                         VIVISECTORS’ DIRECTORY;

                           BEING A LIST OF THE
                   LICENSED VIVISECTORS IN THE UNITED
                                KINGDOM,
                            TOGETHER WITH THE
                    LEADING PHYSIOLOGISTS IN FOREIGN
                              LABORATORIES.

                   _COMPILED FROM AUTHENTIC SOURCES._

                                EDITED BY
                             BENJAMIN BRYAN,
                            WITH A PREFACE BY
                          FRANCES POWER COBBE.

                                 LONDON:
     Published by the VICTORIA STREET SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF
                        ANIMALS FROM VIVISECTION,
                             UNITED WITH THE
   INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE TOTAL SUPPRESSION OF VIVISECTION.
                                  1884.

                       Price, 1s. 6d.; Cloth, 2s.

                                 LONDON:
                       PRINTED BY PEWTRESS & CO.,
                         _Steam Printing Works_,
           28, LITTLE QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS, W.C.




PREFACE.


It was reported at the time of the Franco-German war that the Prussian
soldiers profited much by their general acquaintance with the geography
of France, and by the possession of convenient pocket maps furnished to
them of the invaded districts.

To supply the combatants in the Anti-Vivisection Crusade with some such
knowledge, and such _cartes du pays_ of the physiologists’ ground, was
the original purpose of the _Vivisectors’ Directory_, as prepared for THE
ZOOPHILIST. It was recognised by those engaged in the thick of the fight
against scientific cruelty that it was impossible to retain in the memory
the names of all, even of the most notorious Vivisectors, or to attach to
them their particular class of experiments; nor, in the case of English
physiologists, was it practicable to recall without continual reference
to the whole series of Parliamentary Returns what were the Licenses and
Certificates wherewith they have been annually provided. These facts,--so
often needed in controversy,--it was proposed to marshal in the
compendious form of a _Directory_, so that each Zoophilist possessed of
a copy should be enabled at a moment’s notice to tell in which province
of the “_doloroso regno_” of Research each Vivisector might be found,
what were his titles and address, and the books he had published; and
(if he were a British subject) how many Licenses and Certificates he had
received.

It is hoped that this original purpose of the _Directory_ has been fairly
fulfilled, and that Anti-vivisectionists will universally find it to be
a very serviceable book of reference. It is not pretended that it is a
perfect work, that the names of all the Vivisectors in Europe have been
ascertained, or their worst deeds always ferreted out. Great pains have
been taken to make the list thus complete, and several able agents have
been employed for the purpose abroad as well as at home, under the
editor’s supervision. But years would have been needed for the exhaustive
completion of the task, and the publication would have been indefinitely
delayed. As it now appears, the _Directory_ presents (it is confidently
believed) a mass of reliable information in a convenient form, and at a
moment when it is urgently needed for use in our sorrowful controversy.

But even while this first purpose of the _Directory_ was being patiently
carried out, it became obvious to those concerned that the work would
fulfil at the same time another and still more important end. As name
after name appeared for registration, and cruel experiment followed
cruel experiment in endless variety, the utility of the _Directory_ as
affording evidence of the extent to which Vivisection is now carried on
in Europe, became revealed. No doubt or dispute, it was obvious, could
possibly attach to _this_ testimony. There can be no question here
of that “exaggeration” or those “sensational appeals” wherewith our
opponents are wont to charge us. There can be no “sensational appeal”
in a Dictionary; nay, care has been taken that there should not be one
single epithet editorially applied to any experiment recorded from first
to last. The _Directory_ is a mere dry Register, like an ordinary Medical
or Clerical Directory of names, dates, places, degrees, books, pamphlets,
licenses, and certificates. Only some _verbatim_ quotations are added,
with exact references to chapter and verse. If these should happen to
convey most damning accusations, it is the Vivisectors themselves who
have registered their own offences.

But it is a sickening revelation, even to those who have for years back
been steeped to the lips in this Dead Sea literature. Few or none will
have realized, we believe, till they look into this Directory as a whole,
how infinitely varied have been the devices of the tormentors of animals,
how relentless the diligence of these explorers of living tissues, these
harpists whose instruments are quivering nerves, these diggers into
living brains who leave them “like lately-hoed potato fields.” Not the
poor humble frogs alone, of which we are wont to hear, but every class
of sensitive and intelligent animal seems to be in turn the victim of
pitiless experiment,--the commonest of all being the most loving servants
of mankind. Not one organ of their beautiful frames but has been chosen
for the explorations of a dozen enquirers, and mangled, burned, torn
out, or inoculated with some horrible disease. The well-known maladies
which result from human drunkenness and vice have been cunningly conveyed
to dogs and apes. The breasts of mother brutes nursing their young have
been cut off, and the mutilated creatures dropped back to die among their
little ones whom they can no longer feed. Pregnant animals have been
continually cut open. An Italian physiologist (Mosso) injects putrified
human brains into animals. The eyes are chosen as the special seats
for inoculation, because, through the transparent body the processes
of disease can be most easily watched. Balbiani varnished the skins of
dogs, so that after long hours in which all exudation was stopped, the
creatures expired--stewed, as it were, in their own blackened blood.
Claude Bernard and Alfred Richet baked them alive in stoves constructed
for that hideous purpose. Paul Bert and Cyon place them under atmospheric
pressures till a dog comes out stiffened all over “like a piece of wood.”
Brown-Séquard and Brondgeest cut the spinal cords of guinea-pigs and
rabbits, and Chauveau opens the spinal canal of horses and irritates
the roots of the nerves. Nasse injects salt into the veins, and Watson
Cheyne injects micrococci into the eyes. Blondlot and Heidenhain
establish fistulas. Aufrecht endeavours to create kidney disease, and
Köbner leprosy. Bacchi and Donders pour acetic acid on the nerves of the
eyes. Audigé, Colin, Miss Adams, Gréhaut, and Gscheidlen, experiment on
various animals with mineral and vegetable poisons; and Fayrer, Brunton,
and Lacerda with that of snakes. The bile ducts of dogs and cats are
ligatured by Wickham Legg and Rutherford. Skulls of monkeys and dogs
are opened and the brains mutilated and stimulated with electricity by
Ferrier, Yeo, Horsley, Schäfer, Goltz, Hitzig, Fritsch, Golgi, Grützner,
Günther Leyden, Hermann, Lovèn, Munk, Longet, Luchsinger, Ott, and
Vulpian; and the stomach, heart, liver and spleen, are cut into and
diversely dissected alive by a whole host of physiologists, Roy, Gaskell,
Lépine, Pellacani, Cohnheim, Marey, Martin, Colasanti, Panum, Moleschott,
and Flint.

When it is remembered that, according to Claude Bernard in his latest
work, we may “take for granted that experiments, when not otherwise
described, are performed on curarized dogs”--that is, on highly
sensitive creatures, placed in a condition which he himself describes
as “accompanied by the most atrocious suffering which the imagination
of man can conceive,”--we have before us in this small _Directory_ a
record of agonies before which the brain grows dizzy and the heart sick.
That any man not utterly science-hardened can contemplate them with
indifference, and refuse to lift his voice against them, is difficult to
understand. He who will look through this little book and then “pass by
on the other side,” might, one would think, have strolled round Nero’s
martyr-lighted gardens and turned unmoved away.

                                                                 F. P. C.




THE VIVISECTORS’ DIRECTORY.


=Abraham, Phineas S.=, 5, Clare Street, Dublin. M.A.T.C. Dub.; B. Sc.
Loud.; F.R.C.S.E. 1880; (St. Barthol. Lond.; T.C. Dub. and Paris); 1st
Sen. Mod. and Large Gold Medallist in Nat. Sci. and Mod. in Exper. Sci.,
T.C. Dub., 1871; Hon. Sec. Dub. Biol. Club., Contrib. to Proc. Zool.
Socs., Lond. and Paris, &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection in Physiological Lecture Room of Royal
College of Surgeons, Dublin, in 1880._


=Adams, Hope Bridges= (Miss), Student Bedford College, studied medicine
at Leipzig under Professors Ludwig and W. His. Graduated L.K.Q.C.P.
Ireland and M.D. Zurich. Married to Dr. Walthers. Settled in practice at
Frankfort. Leipzig Pathological Institute.

“Miss Bridges Adams made a number of experiments on the secretion of
hæmoglobin in the Pathological Institute at Leipzig, on rabbits and dogs,
which she poisoned slowly with chlorate of potassium and other similar
substances, by which the kidneys, bladder, and spleen were morbidly
affected. The animals vomited, a deposit collected in the bladder, and
they died after sufferings more or less prolonged. Dr. Lebedoff (of St.
Petersburg), who is continuing the investigations, affirms that she
attained no definite result and that the experiments do not give one the
impression of having been carried out with thoroughness.”--_Thier u.
Menschen Freund_, No. 7, 1883.


=Albertoni= (Prof.), Materia Medica R. Univ. Genoa. Substitute in Chair
of Physiology in absence of Prof. Cerradini, Senior Physician Hospital
for Chronic Diseases.

Author of “Influenza del cervello nella produzione dell’ epilessia; che
cosa avvenga del sangue nella trasfusione;” and joint author with Dr.
Bufalini: “Sull’ aumento delle pulsazioni cardiache dietro l’eccitazione
delle prime radici dorsali;” and with Dr. F. Lussana, of “Sull’ alcool,
ricerche sperimentali”; 3rd art. in “Lo sperimentale,” 1874.

Experiments in transfusion of blood, tried successfully on dogs,
subsequently on three human patients who died, the transfusion having
“hastened the fatal issue.”--_Archiv. Ital._, Tome 2, p. 180. Repeated
experiments of Chirone and Curci on apes, arriving at opposite
conclusions.


=Albini, Commendatore Giuseppe,= Palazzo Dini, Via Museo Nazionale,
Naples. Oculist. Prof. Histology, Anatomy and Physiology. Director of
the Institute of Physiology in Royal University, Naples. Vice-President
of the Academy of Physical and Mathematical Science. President of the
Neapolitan Branch of Italian Alpine Club.

Author of “Ueber das Gift der Salamander Maculata,” Vienna, 1858;
“Sull’ azione aspirante del cuore,” Naples, 1862; “Sul mecanismo della
deglutizione,” 1863; “Guarigione di una Fistola gastrica in un cane,”
1867; “Guida allo studio della Fisiologia normale e sperimentale,”
1870; “Rendiconto dell’ Istituto fisiologico di Parma,” Parma, 1860;
“Rendiconto dell’ Istituto fisiologico di Napoli,” 1860-64.


=Anderson, Richard John=, 58, Wellington Park, Belfast. M.A. Qu. Univ.
Irel. (1st Hons. in Exper. Science, Gold Medal and Prize), 1870; B.A.
(2nd Hons. and Prize in Exper. Science), 1869; M.D. (1st Hons., Gold
Medal and Prize) 1872; M.R.C.S. (Eng., and L.M.) 1872; (Belfast, St.
Barthol. London, Leipzig, Paris, and Heidelberg); Demonstrator of Anat.
Qu. Coll. Belfast; Prof. of Zoology, Galway, 1884.

Contributed “Abnormal Arrangement of Peritoneum,” Journ. Anat. and
Physiol., 1878; “The Presence of an Astragalo-schapoid Bone in Man,”
_Ibid._, 1880; “Respiratory Excitation and Depression,” Dub. Journ. Med.
Science, 1880; and other Contributions to Journ. Anat. and Physiol., Dub.
Journ. Med. Science, Virchow’s Archiv., and Brit. Med. Journ.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the Physiological Laboratory, Queen’s
College, Belfast, in 1879-80-81-82-83. No Experiments returned in
1882-83._


=Arloing=, (Prof.) Prof. Anat. and Physiol, and of practical experiments
in the École Nationale Vétérinaire of Lyons.


=Aufrecht=, (Dr.), Magdeburg.

“Experiments in the artificial induction of diseases of the kidneys.
Used formerly to tie the ureter, has now injected _Cantharides_ under
the skin of rabbits, and produced the disease in all its forms.”--_Med.
Centralblatt_, No. 47, 1882.


=Aubert, Hermann.= Prof. Rostock University.

Author of “Physiologie der Netzhaut,” Breslau, 1865; jointly with Gustav
Roever, of Rostock, of “Ueber de Vasomotorischen Wirkungen des nervus
vagus, laryngicus und sympathicus,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. II., p.
211. This essay describes experiments on dogs, cats, rabbits, and lambs.

“Constructor of a ‘handy apparatus’ for bringing animals into a state of
asphyxia in air attenuated or deprived of oxygen.”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._,
27, p. 566.


=Audigé, R. H. T.=, 26, Avenue Bosquet, Paris. M.D., Paris, 1874.

Author of Thèse “Recherches expérimentales sur le spasme des voies
biliaires,” Paris.

“Alcohols administered in a slow and continuous manner were found to give
rise to various disorders. Vomiting of biliary matter and glairy mucus
together with more or less severe diarrhœa were observed. Difficulty of
breathing, muscular tremor, and even paresis of the hinder extremities
were also recorded. Examination after death revealed congestive changes
of the alimentary canal and of the liver, but no hepatic cirrhosis.
Well-marked hyperæmia of the lungs and atheroma of the large vessels,
especially the aorta were also detected.… Absinthe when given to the
animals gave rise to great excitement with muscular contracture and
cutaneous hyperæsthesia.”--_Lancet_, June 30th, 1883.

“… We must not overlook the extreme sensitiveness of the mucous membrane
which lines the ducts; we have just seen that an injection into the
biliary ducts of water mixed with a small quantity of acetic acid
produces in dogs acute pain.”--_Collection de Thèses pour le Doctorat_,
Paris, 1874, p. 27.

The biliary ducts of a curarised dog dissected out and then excited by
electricity so as to produce spasms.--_Ibid._


=Axenfeld, Alexandre=, Camerino, Italy. Prof. pathologie médicale, Med.
Faculty, Paris.

Contributed to “Dictionnaire Encyclopédique des Sciences Médicales,”
Paris, 1880.


=Bacchi, M. E.= M.D., Turin, Laureate Univ., Turin; M.D. Paris, 1874;
Prof. Ophthalmology, Medical Faculty, Paris.

Author of “Contribution à l’étude de l’étiologie de la sclérochoroïdite
postérieure, Paris, 1874.”

This Thesis also describes experiments in which neuralgic pains are
produced by the application of electricity to the orbital nerves of a
rabbit--the torture being continued for from half-an-hour to an hour
daily from September 14th to October 30th.

Exper. IV. “I exposed the upper orbital nerve on the left side of another
rabbit, and then I poured on to it a few drops of a strong solution of
acetic acid. The pain was so violent that the animal emitted heartrending
shrieks and writhed in the throes of a violent agony.”--_Collection de
Thèse pour le Doctorat_, Paris, 1874, pp. 59 and 61.


=Baginsky, Benno.= M.D. Berlin, 1872.

Contrib. “Über die Folgen der Drucksteigerung in der Paukenhöhle,”
Virchow’s Archiv., 1881.

Made experiments on dogs in the Veterinary School of Berlin.


=Balbiani= (Prof.). Prof. Embryology, Coll. de France.

Made experiments by varnishing the skins of animals, especially rabbits
and guinea-pigs.--_Traité de physiologie, Béclard_, Paris, 1880, Vol. I.,
p. 495. Chiefly known as an Embryologist.


=Balfour, Francis Maitland.= B. 1851, d. 1882. (Killed by a fall on the
Glaciers of Courmayeur Alps). Educated at Harrow and Cambridge, where
he graduated subsequently; he studied at the Stazione Zoologica at
Naples, under Dr. Dohrn. Was Lecturer on Natural Science, Embryology,
and Comparative Anatomy at Trinity College, Cambridge. Fell. Roy. Soc.
1878; Mem. Counc. Roy. Soc.; Pres. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 1881; LL.D.
Glasgow 1880. The Professorship of Animal Morphology at Cambridge was
created specially for him. Was for several years one of the editors of
the _Quarterly Journal of Microscopic Science_. A Balfour Fund has been
raised to found memorial at Cambridge.


=Balfour, John Hutton=, Junr., East Brighton Crescent, Portobello, M.B.,
Edin. and C.M., 1881.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, Edinburgh, Materia
Medica Department, in 1882, and Certificate for Experiments without
Anæsthetics, same year._


=Barker, John=, M.D. Deceased, 1879. M.D. Dublin, 1863; M.B. 1846, B.A.;
F.R.C.S.I. 1863; L. 1846; (T.C. Dublin); Exam. in Anat. and Surg. and
Cur. Mus. M.R.C.S.I.; M.R.I.A.; formerly Demonstrator of Anatomy, Univ.
Dublin.

Author of Cryptogamic Part in “Steel’s Handbook of Field Botany,” and
other papers.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin
Physiological Laboratory and Lecture Room, 1878-79. No experiments
returned._


=Barlow, John=, 85, Kelvingrove Street, Glasgow. M.D. Edin., 1879; M.B.
and C.M. 1875; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1874; F.F.P.S. Glasg., 1881; (Anderson
Univ., Univs. Glasg. and Edin.); Prof. of Inst. of Med. Anderson’s Coll.
Glasg.; late Muirhead Demonst. of Physiol., Univ. Glasg.; House Surg.
Glasg. Roy. Infirm.

Contributed “Mode of Demonstrating Pflüger’s Law of Contraction,” Jour.
Anat. and Physiol., Vol. XII.; “Physiological Action of Ozonised Air,”
_Ibid._, Vol. XIII.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University of Glasgow Physiological
Laboratory and Class Room in 1878-79-80-83. Certificate in 1878 and 1879
for Illustrations of Lectures, for Experiments without Anæsthetics, and
for Testing previous Discoveries; in 1880 for Illustrations of Lectures
and for Experiments without Anæsthetics; and in 1883 for Illustrations of
Lectures. No Experiments returned in 1883._


=Bartholow, Robert.= Cincinnati. M.D.

Author of “A Practical Treatise on Materia Medica and Therapeutics,” New
York, 1878.

Experiments on the action of Gelsemium sempervirens.


=Battistini, Attilio.= M.D. University of Rome.


=Beatson, George Thomas=, 2, Royal Crescent, Glasgow. B.A. Cantab.,
1870; M.D. Edin., 1878; C.M., 1874; L.R.C.S. Edin., 1874 (Edin. Univ.);
formerly Sen. Pres. Roy. Med. Soc. Edin.

Contributed “On the causes of Expense in the Antiseptic Treatment of
Wounds,” Glasg. Med. Journ., 1879; “Origin and Composition of Bodies
found in Compound Ganglia,” Journ. Anat. and Physiol., Vol. XIII.;
“Diagnosis of Malignant Abdominal Tumours,” Glasg. Med. Journ., 1879.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Glasgow Physiological
Laboratory in 1879 and Certificate dispensing with obligation to kill
before recovery from Anæsthetics._


=Beaunis, Henri Etienne.= Prof, of Physiology, Med. Faculty, Nancy.

Author of “Nouveaux éléments de Physiologie humaine,” Paris, 1876;
joint author with M. Bouchard of “Éléments d’Anatomie descriptive et
d’Embryologie,” 1873.

Devotes several chapters of his work on Physiology to a detail of the
necessary arrangements of the physiological laboratory, and particularly
recommends students to study physiology by vivisecting frogs, as being
more readily procured than other animals, and easily held by pinning them
on a piece of cork.


=Béclard, Jules=, au Siége de l’Académie, 39, Rue des Saints-Pères. B.
1818; M.D. Paris, 1842; Professor of Physiology Med. Faculty, Paris;
Perpetual Sec. Acad. of Medicine, &c.

Author of “Traité élémentaire de Physiologie,” Paris, 1880; “Expériences
constatant l’électricité du sang chez les animaux vivants,” Metz, 1863.
Contributed to “Dictionnaire Encyclopédique des Sciences Médicales,”
Paris, 1880.

“When by the aid of appropriate means, we suppress in animals the
cutaneous evaporation, and thus absolutely prevent the discharge of
water, vapour, and carbonic acid, grave disorders are set up little by
little, terminating in death. In order thus to suppress the functions of
the skin, it is advisable to lay bare, by means of shaving closely, the
whole of the skin of a dog, sheep, rabbit, or horse, and to cover the
exposed surface with a thick drying varnish. Animals thus treated succumb
at the expiration of various periods, but they rarely survive twelve
hours. After death the tissues and organs are found gorged with black
blood. It is probable that the accumulated carbonic acid has brought on
slow asphyxia. When the pulmonary outlet is sealed up, the asphyxia is
rapid.”--_Traité de Physiologie_, Béclard, Paris, 1880, Vol. I., p. 495.


=Béclard, Pierre Augustin.= B. 1785, d. 1825. Assistant to M. Roux, 1809;
Prosector Med. Faculty Paris, 1811; Prof. Anat., 1818; Mem. Acad. of
Med., 1820.

Made experiments jointly with Legallois on the Act of Vomiting.--_Traité
de Physiologie_, Béclard, Paris, 1880, Vol. I., p. 62.

Author of “Additions à l’Anatomie générale de X. Bichat,” Paris, 1821;
“Éléments d’Anatomie générale,” Paris, 1823; Traité Élémentaire de
Physiologie, Septième Edition, Part I., Paris, 1880; Part II., 1884.


=Bégin, Louis Jaques.= B. at Liège, 1793; d. 1859. Prof. Physiol.,
Military Gymnasium, Metz, 1821; M.D. Strasbourg, 1823; Prof. Anat.,
Physiol. and Surgery, Med. Faculty, Strasbourg; Pres. Acad. of Med.,
Paris, 1847; Mem. of numerous foreign learned societies.

Author of “Traité de Physiologie pathologique,” 1828, &c.; contributed
Art. “Vomissement,” “Dictionnaire Encyclopédique des Sciences Médicales.”


=Behrend, F.= Student, Berlin.

Experiments on rabbits under Dr. Lewin on the chemical effect of uva ursi
leaves and arbutin.--Virchow’s _Archiv._, Vol.. 92, Pt. III.


=Bell, Sir Charles.= B. 1778, d. 1842. M.E.C.S., Surg. Roy. Infirm.,
Edin., 1797; M.R.C.S., Lond., Surg. Middlesex Hosp., 1812; Sen. Prof.
Anat. Surg. Roy. Coll. Surg., Lond., and M.C., 1824; Lect. Physiol.,
Univ. Coll., Lond., 1826; knighted, 1831; Prof. Surg. Univ. Edin., 1831.

Author Vol. 3 of “Anatomy of the Human Body,” 3 vols., London, 1793
(by John Bell); “Anatomy of the Brain,” London, 1802; “A System of
Operative Surgery,” 2 vols., London, 1807; “An Exposition of the Natural
System of the Nerves of the Human Body,” London, 1824; “The Nervous
System of the Human Body,” London, 1830; “The Hand, its Mechanism and
Vital Endowments,” London, 1834-52; Various papers in “Philosophical
Transactions,” “Institute of Surgery,” &c., &c. The discoverer of the
double function of the spinal nerves, and the most humane vivisector
on record. Among the published accounts of his experiments is the
following:--

“After delaying long on account of the unpleasant nature of the
operation, I opened the spinal canal of a rabbit and cut the posterior
roots of the nerves of the lower extremity--the creature still
crawled--but I was deterred from repeating the experiment by the
protracted cruelty of the dissection. I reflected that the experiment
would be satisfactory if done on an animal recently knocked down and
insensible--that whilst I experimented on a living animal, there
might be a trembling or action excited in the muscles by touching a
sensitive nerve, which motion it would be difficult to distinguish
from that produced more immediately through the influence of the motor
nerves.”--_Nervous System of the Human Body_ (Longman and Co.), 1830, p.
31.

The following extract contains the well-known conclusions of Sir Charles
Bell respecting the utility of Vivisection and its moral aspect:--

“In concluding these papers, I hope I may be permitted to offer a
few words in favour of Anatomy, as better adapted for discovery than
experiment. Anatomy is already looked upon with prejudice by the
thoughtless and ignorant--let not its professors unnecessarily incur
the censures of the humane. Experiments have never been the means of
discovery--and a survey of what has been attempted of late years in
physiology, will prove that the opening of living animals has done
more to perpetuate error than to confirm the just views taken from the
study of anatomy and natural motions. In a foreign review of my former
papers the results have been considered as a further proof in favour of
experiments. They are, on the contrary, deductions from anatomy, and I
have had recourse to experiments not to form my own opinions, but to
impress them upon others. It must be my apology that my utmost efforts
of persuasion were lost, while I urged my statements on the grounds
of anatomy alone. For my own part I cannot believe that Providence
should intend that the secrets of nature are to be discovered by the
means of cruelty, and I am sure that those who are guilty of protracted
cruelties do not possess minds capable of appreciating the laws of
Nature.”--_Ibid._, p. 217.

Similar sentiments are expressed in his “Essay on the Forces which
Circulate the Blood,” Part II., p. 25.


=Bellesme, Jousset de.= School of Physiology, Nantes.

Author of “Physiologie Comparée Recherches expérimentelles sur les
fonctions du balancier chez les insectes,” Paris, 1879; “Recherches sur
la digestion chez les mollusques céphalopodes,” Comptes rendus Vol.
LXXXVIII. (1879), p. 428; “Recherches sur l’action physiologique du
grenat ou résidu de fabrication de la fuchsine,” Comptes rendus, Vol.
LXXXVIII. (1879), p. 187.


=Belli, Aristide= (Prof.), Director of the School of Veterinary Medicine,
Urbino.


=Bennet, Alex. Hughes=, 13, Old Cavendish Street, W. M.D., Edin. (Gold
Medallist), 1872; M.B. and C.M., 1869, M.R.C.P., Lond. 1876 (Edin.,
Lond. and Paris); Mem. Path. Soc. Lond.; Ext. Mem. and Emer. Sen. Pres.
Roy. Med. Soc. Edin.; Physician Hospital for Epilepsy and Paralysis, St.
John’s Wood, and to the Westminster Hospital, &c., &c.

Author of “An Experimental Inquiry into the Physiological Actions
of Theine, Caffeine, Quaranine, Cocaine, and Theobromine,” 1873; “A
Practical Treatise on Electro-Diagnosis in Diseases of the Nervous
System;” “Illustrations of the Superficial Nerves and Muscles, with their
Motor Points,” &c.


=Bennett, John Hughes=, M.D. Professor of the Institutes of Medicine in
the University of Edinburgh; died 1875.

President of the Committee which performed the experiments on the effect
of mercury, &c., on the livers of dogs. He was accustomed to lecture to
his class on the benefit of vivisection, and advised his students to
resist every attempt to interfere with it. Originator and suggestor of
Rutherford’s experiments on the bile ducts.


=Béraud, J. B.= Author of “Manuel de physiologie,” Paris, 1853.
Experiments on generative organs.


=Bergeron, E. J.=, 75, Rue St. Lazare, Paris. M.D. Paris, 1866; Prof.
Med. Fac. and Insp. of Lunatic Asylums for the Department of Seine,
Knight of the Legion of Honour.

Author of “Les Réactions physiologiques des Poisons,” Paris, 1836;
“Sur l’existence normale du cuivre dans l’organisme,” Paris, 1873;
“L’empoisonnement par la strychnine,” Paris, 1877, &c.

At the age of 26, M. Bergeron was commissioned to undertake a long series
of experiments in several poisoning cases.


=Berlin, W.= (Dr.), Amsterdam University.


=Bernard, Claude.= B. at St. Julien, Rhone, France, 1813; d. 1878. M.D.
Paris, 1843; Pupil and Assistant to M. Majendie; Prof. of Medicine at
Faculty of Science, Paris; Member of the Academy of Science; succeeded
Majendie as Professor of Experimental Physiology at the College of France
in 1855; Prof. Gen. Physiol. at Museum, 1868; Mem. Acad. Med., 1861;
Pres. Biological Soc., 1867; Member of French Academy, 1869; Commander of
the Legion of Honour, 1867. Member of the Institute of France.

Author of “Leçons de physiologie expérimentale,” Paris, 1854-1855, 2
vols.; “Introduction à l’étude de la Médecine expérimentale,” Paris,
1855; “Leçons sur les effets des Substances toxiques et Médicamenteuses,”
Paris, 1857; “Leçons sur la physiologie et la pathologie du système
nerveux,” Paris, 1858; “Leçons sur les propriétés physiologiques et
les altérations pathologiques des liquides de la l’organisme,” Paris,
1859; “Leçons de pathologie expérimentale,” Paris, 1871; “Leçons sur les
anæsthétiques et sur l’asphyxie,” Paris, 1875; “Leçons sur la chaleur
animale,” Paris, 1876; “Leçons sur le diabète et la glycogenèse animale,”
Paris, 1877; “Leçons sur les phénomènes de la vie, etc.,” Paris, 1878;
“La science expérimentale,” Paris, 1878.

“A physiologist” (Bernard wrote) “is no ordinary man. He is a learned
man, a man possessed and absorbed by a scientific idea. He does not hear
the animals’ cries of pain. He is blind to the blood that flows. He sees
nothing but his idea, and organisms which conceal from him the secrets he
is resolved to discover.”--_Introd. à l’étude_, p. 180.

Baked sixteen dogs and numerous rabbits in a stove. These animals,
Bernard tells us (_Leçons sur la Chaleur Animale_, p. 347), survived
respectively eight minutes, ten minutes, twenty-four minutes, and so on,
according to the heat of the stove and according to the position of their
heads within it, or outside of it. “It became impossible,” he says of
them, “to count the pantings. At last the creature falls into convulsions
and dies--uttering a cry.”

“Our hands without doubt are empty at present, but our mouths may be full
of legitimate promises for the future.”--_Sur le Diabète_, p. 43.


=Bernstein, Jules= (Prof.) B. Berlin, 1839. Halle University. M.D.
Berlin; Prof. extraordinary of Medicine, University of Berlin, 1871;
Prof. extraordinary of Medicine at Halle, 1873.

Author of works on the Nervous System; “Herzstillstand durch
Sympathicusreizung;” “Die fuenf Sinne des Menschen,” in “Internationale
Wissenschaftliche Bibliothek,” Vol. XII., 1875; “Untersuchungen ueber den
Erregungsvorgang im Nerven und Muskelsystem.” Heidelberg. Darmstadt, 1871.

Has made a special study of the effects of electric currents on the
nerves, and his work entitled “Untersuchungen ueber den Erregungsvorgang
im Nerven und Muskelsystem,” is well known to physiologists.


=Berruti, Giuseppe.=

Author of “La Crania tornia nella practica ostretica,” Turin, 1876;
with Perosini of “De l’ablation des capsules surrenales,” in _Gazette
Hebdomadaire de Méd._, 1856, p. 863 et 924.

Performed numerous experiments on Horses.


=Bert, Paul=, 9, rue Guy-de-la-Brosse, Paris. M.D., Paris, 1863; Prof.
Physiol. Fac. Sci. at Bordeaux, 1869; obtained the Prize of 20,000 francs
from the Academy of Science for his work on “La Pression Barométrique” in
1875; President Biol. Soc.; Senator and Minister of Public Worship for
France, under the Presidency of M. Gambetta.

Author of “Notes d’Anatomie et de Physiologie comparées,” 1867; “La
Pression Barométrique,” 1877; Contrib. Scientific Articles to “La
République Française.”

“He thought it would be interesting to experiment upon newborn animals
(cats), which, it is well known, he tells us, resist asphyxia much longer
than full grown ones. (P. 571.) From his apparatus for keeping animals
in compressed oxygen he draws a dog in full convulsions, strong enough
to enable him to carry it by one paw, like a bit of wood. (P. 784.) The
attacks of convulsions, under strong tension of oxygen, are, he says,
really curious and startling.” (P. 799.)--_Pression Barométrique._

“In this experiment a dog was first rendered helpless and incapable
of any movement, even of breathing, which function was performed by a
machine blowing through a hole in its windpipe.” All this time, however,
“its intelligence, its sensitiveness, and its will, remained intact,”
“a condition accompanied by the most atrocious sufferings that the
imagination of man can conceive.” (_Vide_ Claude Bernard in _Revue des
Deux Mondes_, 1st September, 1864, pp. 173, 182, 183, &c.) “In this
condition, the side of the face, the side of the neck, the side of the
fore-leg, interior of the belly and the hip, were dissected out in order
to lay bare respectively the sciatic, the splanchnics, the median, the
pneumo-gastric and sympathetic, and the infra-orbital nerves. These were
excited by electricity for ten consecutive hours, during which time the
animal must have suffered unutterable torment, unrelieved even by a cry.
The inquisitors then left for their homes, leaving the tortured victim
alone with the engine working upon it, till death came in the silence of
the night and set the sufferer free.” (Roy. Com., Q. 4,111.)--_Archives
de Physiologie_, Vol. II., 1869, p. 650.


=Betz, Fr. Hugo.= M.D.; Surgeon in practice in Schönan, Silesia, 1877.

Contrib. “Anatomischer Nachweiss zweir Gehirncentra,” Centralblatt f. d.
Med. Wiss., 1874.

Made experiments on the brains of dogs.


=Bezold, Albert Von.= B. 1836, at Ansbach, d. 1868 at Wurzburg. After
studying at Munich and Wurzburg, Bezold went to Berlin to study
physiology under Du Bois Reymond; there he became the friend of Isidor
Rosenthal and Wilhelm Kühne. In addition to the study of physiology,
Bezold followed Virchow’s lectures on pathological anatomy and worked
in the laboratory of Hoppe-Seyler, now Prof. of Physiological Chemistry
at Tübingen. He became assistant to Du Bois Reymond, but was soon after
called to the Chair of Physiology at Jena. Bezold’s experiments on the
nervus vagus produced results opposed to the theories of Schiff and
Moleschott. Professor of Physiology at Wurzburg, 1865, where he extended
the laboratory to be one of the most complete in Germany. While at Jena
he had already enlarged the laboratory there, and had taken a journey to
Edinburgh to superintend the arrangement of Dr. Bennett’s laboratory.

Author of “Untersuchungen über die Innervation des Herzens,” Leipsig,
1863; “Untersuchungen über die electrische Erregung der Nerven und
Muskeln” Leipsig, 1861.


=Bianchi=, (Prof.), 315, Via Salvator Rosa, Naples. Electrotherapist.
Prof. Medical Pathology, Royal University, Naples.


=Bichat, Marie François Xavier.= B. 1771; d. 1802. Studied at Nantes,
Lyons, and Paris, where he became the pupil of Desault, whose works
he edited posthumously, 1795. Relinquished surgery to devote himself
entirely to physiology. Physician to the Hôtel Dieu, 1799, where he
experimented with various drugs.

Author of “Traité des Membranes en général et de diverses Membranes en
particulier,” Paris, 1800; “Recherches Physiologiques sur la vie et la
mort,” Paris, 1803; “Anatomie générale appliquée à la Physiologie et à
la Médecine,” Paris, 1801; “Anatomie descriptive,” Paris, 1802-1803, 5
vols., end of 2nd and 3rd Vols. by Buisson, 5th Vol. by Roux.

“Experimental Physiology dates from Bichat.”--_Traité de Physiologie_,
Béclard, 1880, vol. I., p. 11.

“Bichat has made, in this respect, an experiment on living animals,
which all physiologists have since repeated. A tube with a turn-cock
is introduced and fixed in the trachea of a dog, and an artery is
subsequently opened in the animal. At first the respiration is allowed
free action; then the turn-cock is shut, respiration is thereby
suspended, and with it the entrance of the air into the lungs. The blood
which issued from the wound in the artery was first red; it becomes
analagous to venous blood. When the turn-cock is again opened, the blood
once more takes a bright hue.”--_Ibid._, p. 336.


=Bidder, Alfred Von.= M.D. Berlin.

Author of “Ueber fonctionnel verschiedene und räumlich getrennte
Nervencentra im Froschherzen,” Müller’s Archiv., 1844; Joint author with
M. Schmidt “Die Verdauungs säfte und der Stoffwechsel,” 1852; Contrib.
to Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift, 1883; Arch f. Anat. u. Physiol.,
1867.

Performed numerous experiments on animals with M. Schmidt.--_Traité de
Physiologie_, Béclard, 1880, Vol. I., p. 662.


=Billroth, Theodor.= B. Bergen, Isle of Rügen, Prussia, 1829. Surgeon,
Physiologist, Microscopist, Univs. Greifsvald, Göttingen, Berlin, and
Vienna. Clin. Asst. Univ. Berlin, 1830; Prof. Surgery, Zurich, 1860;
Prof. Surgery Vienna, 1867.

Author of “Beobachtungsstudien ueber Wundfieber und accidentelle
Wundkrankheiten,” Berlin, 1862; “Die allgemeine Chirurgische Pathologie
und Therapie,” Berlin, 1863; “Handbuch der allgemeinen und speciellen
Chirurgie, &c.,” Berlin, 1865; “Ueber das Lehren und Lernen der
Medicinischen Wissenschaften an den Universitäten der deutschen
Nation, nebst allgemeinen Bemerkungen ueber Universitäten,” Vienna,
1876; “Untersuchungen ueber die Entwickelung der Blutgefässe, nebst
Beobachtungen aus der Klinischen Chirurgischen Universitäts-Klinik zu
Berlin,” Berlin, 1876, &c.


=Binz, Carl.= Born 1832, at Berncastel on the Moselle; studied Med. at
Univs. Wurzburg, Bonn, and Berlin; M.D. 1855 (Bonn); Private Prof. of
Med. and Pharmacology, Bonn, 1862; Prof. extraordinary and founder of
Institute of Pharmacology University of Bonn, 1868; Prof. in ordinary,
1873. Staff-Surgeon during the campaigns of 1866 and 1870-71.

Author of “Beobachtungen zur inneren Klinik,” Bonn, 1864; “Grinidzüge der
Arznei Mittel Lehre,” “Experimentelle Untersuchungen ueber das Wesen der
Chininwirkung,” Berlin, 1868; “Ueber den Traum,” Bonn, 1878, etc.

Experiments with nitrite of sodium on frogs, rabbits, and
dogs.--_Lancet_, Nov. 3, 1883.

“Binz produced fever in dogs artificially by injecting infusion of
hay or putrid animal matter into their veins, and then tested the
action of quinine by injecting it either at the same time or shortly
afterwards.”--_Experimental Investigation into the action of Medicines_,
T. Lauder Brunton, London, 1875, p. 20.


=Biondi, Adolfo=, Strada Nuova, Monteoliveto 6. Prof. Pathological
Medicine, Royal University, Naples.

“I cannot imagine that any man in his senses would attempt to remove a
human lung with a tumour in it. It would not be resection of parts of
four ribs which would permit the removal of a tumour sufficiently large
to admit of accurate diagnosis; and I cannot observe, in the literature
just at the moment accessible, that any other kinds of tumours occur in
the lung, save those of hydatid origin, and those of a cancerous nature.
If the tumour were hydatid, the removal of lung would be unnecessary. If
the tumour proved to be an aneurysm, the disaster would be awful.… The
facility with which Dr. Biondi has removed lungs, and parts of lungs,
from dogs, guinea-pigs, cats, fowls, pigeons, and sheep, and the absence
of mortality from such operations, is likely to be a snare rather than
a help. It does not need saying, that the removal of a healthy lung,
collapsed by the introduction of air into the pleura, would be a very
easy matter, and very different from the removal of a diseased and
adherent organ. There would be as much difference as there is between
normal ovariotomy and removal of a pyosalpinx. It is perfectly clear
that these animals, with their deep and narrow chests, differ very much
from us with our wide and shallow cavities, in their power of enduring
the accident of acute pneumothorax; certainly they would differ from us
immensely in the facility with which pneumonotomy may be performed. Their
chests are built for the endurance of the special efforts of great speed,
and we have lost those physical characters; and I venture to say that, if
acute pneumothorax were suddenly inflicted upon sixty-three healthy adult
human beings, death would be the immediate result in the great majority
of the experiments.”--_Lawson Tait, F.R.C.S., Brit. Med. Journ., June 20,
1884._


=Birch, J. de Burgh=, Barnard Castle, Durham. M.D. Edin. (Gold
Medallist), 1880, M.B. and C.M., 1877; (Bristol and Edin. Univ.);
F.R.S.E.; late Demonst. of Physiol. Univ. Edin.

Contributed “Constitution and Relations of Bone Lamellæ, Lacunæ, and
Canaliculi, and some effects of Trypsin Digestion on Bone,” Journ.
Physiol. Vol. II.; also contrib. to Proc. Roy. Soc. Edin. and Centralb.
d. Med. Wiss.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University of Edinburgh, Lecture Room
and Physiological Laboratory 1878 and in 1879. Certificate in 1879 for
Illustrations of Lectures; no experiments returned._


=Bischoff, Theodor Ludwig W.= M.D. (Deceased.) Late Prof. Anat. and
Physiol. Munich.

Author of “Commentatio de nervi accessorii Willissii anatomia et
physiologia,” Darmstadt, 1832; “Commentatio de novis quibusdam
experimentis chemico-physiologicus ad illustrandam doctrinam de
respiratione institutis. Praemissae sunt literae L. Gmelin,”
Heidelberg, 1837; “Entwickelungsgeschicte des Hundeeiess,” Brunswick,
1845; “Entwickelungsgeschicte des Meerschweinschens,” Giessen, 1852;
“Entwickelungsgeschicte des Rehes,” Giessen, 1854; “Das Hirngewicht
des Menschen,” Bonn, 1880; and joint author with Carl Voit of “Die
Gesetze der Ernährung des Fleischfressers durch neue Untersuchungen
festgestellt,” Leipsig and Heidelberg, 1860; “Das Studium und die
Ausübung der Medicino durch Frauem,” Munich, 1872; Contrib. to
Encyclopédie Anatomique.

Performed numerous experiments on dogs and goats, on the accessory
and vagus nerves, which he cut through between the cranium and first
vertebra, with the result that the sound of the voice became changed.
“Was most successful with a goat, in which he succeeded in cutting both
accessory nerves, when it could no longer be said to have a voice at all.”


=Bizzozero, Giulio.= B. at Varese, Lombardy, 1846. M.D. Pavia, 1866;
Prof. of Histology, Pavia; Prof. of General Pathology, 1872; Professor of
General Pathology, Royal Univ. Turin; Free Prof. Microscopy applied to
clinical medicine; Assistant to Mantegazza at the experimental Laboratory
of the University of Pavia. Has founded a Laboratory at Turin. Knight of
the Order of the Crown of Italy.

Author of “Studii comparativi sui nemaspermi e sulle ciglia vibratili,”
1864; “Sulla neo formazione del tersuto connettivo e sulle cettule
sernoventi,” 1865; “Di alcune alterazioni dei linfatici del cervello
e della pia madre,” 1868; “Sul midollo delle ossa,” 1868-69; “Sui
rapporti della tubercolosi con altre malattie,” 1874; “Sui linfatici
e sulla struttura delle sierose umane,” 1876-78; “Recherches sur la
physiopathologie du sang” (for which the Acad. of Turin has lately
awarded him the prix Riberi of 20,000 frs.); “D’un nouvel element
morphologique du sang et de son importance dans la thrombose et la
coagulation,” dans Archives Italiennes de biologie, 1882-83; Editor of
“L’Archivio delle Scienze Mediche” (Turin), a journal which relates the
results of his experiments.

Experiments on constitution of blood. Animals cut open and omentum or
mesentery lifted out. Some under chloroform, but “to avoid objection
to the action of chloroform on the blood,” also performed a great
number of experiments on animals not under anæsthetics, but tied to the
table.--_Archiv. Ital._, Tom. II.


=Blix, Magnus Gustaf.= B. 1849. M.D., Professor Laboratory of
Experimental Physiology and Medical Physics, Univ. of Upsala, 1882.

Author of several treatises in “Transactions of Medical Society, Upsala,”
principally concerning the contraction of the muscles, viz., “Bidrag till
laran om Muskelelasticiteter,” 1874; “Ennymyograph: Ophthalmometriska
studier I.,” 1880; “En lymphcardiograph; Till Melysning affragan,
Muravida varmenomfattes till mekaniskt arbete vid Muskelcontractioner,”
1881; “Mya midsag till ophthalmometriens utoeckling: en Zalfregistrerande
perimeter,” 1882.


=Block, Carl Otto=, Dantzig. M.D., 1876.

Made numerous experiments on healthy dogs, and found they did not die if
a piece of the lung was cut out. Hence he became desirous of making the
same experiment on men. His first victim was a girl of fourteen, who died
a few hours after the operation (resection of a piece of the lung).


=Blondlot, Nicolas.= B. 1810. M.D. Paris, 1833; late Prof. Chemistry and
Pharmaceutics Medical School, Nancy.

Author of “Traité analytique de la Digestion,” Nancy, 1843; “Essai sur
les fonctions du foie et doses annexes,” Paris, 1846; “Recherches sur la
digestion des matières Grasses,” Paris, Nancy, 1855.

In his “Treatise on Digestion” Blondlot gives the results of experiments
on dogs with fistulous openings into the stomach. He is generally spoken
of as the first to obtain gastric juice by the establishment of a fistula
into the stomach of the lower animals. (His method is given in detail in
“Béclard’s Traité,” p. 85.) Longet, another vivisector, mentions in his
Treatise of Physiology that a Dr. Bassow read a paper before the Imperial
Society of Naturalists, in Moscow, in 1842, in which he gave an account
of a number of successful attempts to establish a gastric fistula.


=Boccardo, Giuseppe.= Assistant, Physiological Institute, R. University,
Naples.


=Bochefontaine, Louis Théodore.= Prof. Experimental Pathology, Medical
Faculty, Paris.

Author of “Action physiologique de la quinine sur la rate. Essai de
critique expérimentale;” “Thèse pour le Doctorat, Paris,” 1873.

“All the experiments which we describe on this subject have been made
on dogs and on a cat. Some few which are not mentioned were made on
rabbits and a few on guinea-pigs. The results obtained amount to little
or nothing. We must say once for all that our experiments with strychnine
and quinine have also given no exact result.”--_Collection de Thèses pour
le Doctorat_, Paris, 1873, p. 25.

“… Even in the same species of animals, though the experimenters act
under identical conditions, the results obtained are not always the
same.”--_Ibid._, p. 33.


=Böhm, R.= Prof. in Marburg.

Experiments on cats with arsenic and muscarin concerning the exfoliation
of intestinal epithelium.--Virchow’s _Archiv_, Vol. XCII., part 3.


=Bohr= (Dr.). Prof. of Physiology, Copenhagen.


=Bornhardt, A.= Formerly pupil of Cyon, Lab. Physiol. Acad. Med., St.
Petersburg.

Author of “Experimentelle Beiträge zur Physiologie der Bogengänge des
Ohrlabyrinths.”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XII, p. 471.

Experiments on pigeons and rabbits after portions of their brains had
been extirpated.--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XII. (1876), p. 471.


=Bouchard, Charles.= Prof. of Gen. Path., Paris.

Contributor to “Dictionnaire Encyclopédique des Sciences Médicales.”
Author of “De la Pathogénie des Hémorrhagies,” Paris, 1869; “Recherches
nouvelles sur la pellagra,” Paris, 1862; “Éléments d’Anatomie descriptive
et d’Embryologie,” 1873.


=Bousfield, Edward Collins=, Wellesley House, Ashley Road, Bristol.
L.R.C.P. Lond. 1879; M.R.C.S. Eng. 1878; (St. Barthol.); Physiol.
Prosect. St. Barthol. Hosp. 76-77-78. Contributed “On a hitherto unnoted
feature of the blood in Leucocythaemiæ,” Lancet 1879; “Effects of the
Electric Light on Vision,” Ibid. 1880; “Case illustrating the Pathology
of Herpes,” Ibid. 1880.

_Held a License for Vivisection at St. Bartholomew’s Medical School 1880
and 1881. No experiments returned._


=Bowditch, H. P.= Prof. Physiol. Lab. Harvard Med. School, Boston, U.S.

Plethysmographic experiments on the vascular nerves of the extremities.


=Brachet, Jean Louis.= B. at Eivors (France), 1789, d. at Lyons, 1858.
Hosp. Surg., Physician to Prisons, Professor of Physiology School of
Medicine, Physician to Hôtel Dieu, Lyons, Chev. de la Leg. d’Honn.,
Prof. Materia Med. and Therap., Mem. Acads. of Med. Paris, Vienna,
Madrid, Turin; Mem. Acad. Sci., Arts, and Belles Lettres of Lyons, Dijon,
Toulouse, Genoa; Mem. Med. Socs. of Paris, Lyons, Berlin, Göttingen,
Toulouse, Marseilles, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Bordeaux, New Orleans,
Besançon, &c., &c.

Author of “Dissertation Physiologique sur la cause des mouvement de
dilatation des Cœur,” Thèse, Paris, 1813; “Recherches Expérimentales
sur les Fonctions du Système Nerveux Ganglionnaire,” Paris, 1830;
“Traité Complet de l’Hypochondrie,” Lyons, 1844; “Considérations sur le
Système Nerveux Ganglionnaire,” Lyons, 1846; “Physiologie élémentaire de
l’Homme,” Lyons, 1855; “De la Glycogenie Hépatique,” Lyons, 1856. Made
numerous researches on the uses and functions of the Ganglionary system.


=Braidwood, Peter Murray=, 17, Rodney Street, Liverpool, and 2, Delamere
Terrace, Birkenhead. M.D. Edin. (Thesis Gold Medallist) 1863; F.R.C.S.
Edin. 1881, L. 1863; (Edin., Berlin, Prague, and Vienna); Astley Cooper
Prizem. 1868; Honourable mention from Roy. Acad. Sci. Havana, and from
Imp. Council of Russia 1872; Fothergillian Medallist 1877; F.R.M.S.;
Ext. Mem. (late Pres.) Roy. Med. Soc. Edin.; Exam. in Med. Jurisp. Univ.
Edin.; Co-Editor of Liverpool and Manchester Med. and Surg. Reports.
Author “On Pyæmia,” (Astley Cooper Prize Essay 1868); “On the Domestic
Management of Children.” Contrib. “On the Physiological Action of
Dajaksch,” Edin. Med. Journ. 1864; “First and Second Reports on the Life
History of Contagion,” Brit. Med. Journ. 1875-76-77-78, &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection in 1878, also certificates, dispensing
with the obligation to kill, and for testing previous discoveries. No
experiments returned._


=Brailey, William Arthur=, 16, Orchard Street, Portman Square, W. M.A.;
M.D. Cantab. 1874; M.B. 1871; M.R.C.S. Eng. and L.S.A. 1872; B.A. Lond.
1866; (Guy’s and Univ. Camb.); Fell. Down. Coll. Camb. and late Inter.
Coll. Lect. in Nat. Sci.; 1st Class Nat. Sci. Tripos 1867; Exhib. in
Biol. Prelim. Sci. Exam. M.B. Lond. 1865; Mem. Path. Soc.; Mem. Comm.
Ophth. Soc.; Lect. on Comp. Anat. Guy’s and St. George’s Hosp. Med.
Schs.; Curator and Regist. Roy. Lond. Ophth. Hosp.; Ophth. Surg. Evelina
Hosp.; late House Phys. Addenbrooke’s Hosp. Camb. Contributed “On
Pathology of Increased Tension,” Roy. Lond. Ophth. Hosp.; Reps. 1877 and
1879; “A Theory of Elancoma,” Roy. Lond. Ophth. Reps. 1880, &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Guy’s Hospital Museum and Lecture Room
in 1878-79-80. No Experiments returned in 1878 and 1880._


=Brewer= (Dr.), Norwich, Connecticut, U.S.A.

Dr. Brewer published in the _Detroit Therapeutic Gazette_ for September,
1882, an account of fifty experiments made by him on frogs, kittens,
cats, and dogs, with the liquid extract of _Manaca_ (a Brazilian plant)
which he either exhibited “_per oram_” (to quote literally) or injected
subcutaneously. The experiments were evidently made with great care,
and entailed a good many difficult vivisectional operations, such as
the cutting of the crural and sciatic nerves, the tying of the femoral
artery, the cutting of the spinal cord, and the ablation of the cerebrum.
Great pains were taken, and no fewer than eight experiments were
instituted, for the sole purpose of ascertaining whether Manaca affected
the nerves directly or through the intermediation of the blood, as most
poisons do, prussic acid not excepted.


=Brodie, Sir Benjamin.= B. 1783, d. 1862. M.R.C.S.E. 1805; Asst. to Mr.
Wilson as Demonst. of Anat.; Asst. Surg. St. George’s 1810; Croonian
Lecturer to Roy. Soc.; Prof. Anat. and Surg. Roy. Coll. Surg. 1819;
Sergeant Surgeon to William IV. 1832; was created a Baronet 1834; Mem.
Court of Exam. Coll. Surg. 1835; President Roy. Coll. Surg. 1844;
President Roy. Soc. 1858.

Author of “Experiments and observations on the different modes in which
Death is produced by certain Vegetable Poisons.” _Edin. Review_, Vol.
XVIII., p. 370, 1811.

As a young hospital surgeon Brodie employed his leisure in observations
and experiments. Tied the bile ducts in cats.--_Quar. Jour. Science and
the Arts_, Jan., 1823, p. 341.


=Brondgeest, P. J.=

Author of “Ueber den Tonus der Willkürlichen Muskeln,” Mueller’s Archiv.,
1860.

The following is an experiment of J. P. Brondgeest’s:--“Cut the spinal
cord beneath the bulb, and lay bare the sciatic nerves on each posterior
limb. Cut one of these two nerves, and suspend the creature by the
head. If we then observe the situation of the two limbs, a difference
is perceived, which has been shown to be invariable in sixty-two
experiments. The foot of which the nerve is cut is limp and pendant; that
of which the nerve is intact is slightly bent in all its articulations.
M. Brondgeest made similar experiments on rabbits and birds.… If we
detach by one of its extremities a muscle newly prepared on a living
animal, taking care to preserve its nerve, and attach to the extremity
of this muscle a certain weight, … we shall see that it will augment in
weight.”--_Traité de Physiologie_, Béclard, 1862, pp. 640-41.


=Brouardel, Paul.= M.D., Paris, 1865; Phys. St. Andrew’s Hosp. 1873;
Prof. Med. Juris., Med. Fac., Paris, 1879.

Author of “Étude critique des diverses médications employées contre le
diabète sucré,” Paris, 1869; Editor of “Annales d’hygiène publique et de
médecine légale.”


=Browne, James Crichton.= M.D.; Medical officer of the West Riding
Lunatic Asylum.

“Has for ten years given attention to the subject; has performed
two series of experiments, one not involving destruction of life,
to ascertain the action of nitrite of amyl, and one with regard to
pycrotoxine, the essential constituent of coculus indicus; 46 animals in
all, gives details, were operated on; was successful in discovering an
antidote, chloral, for this poison; no opportunity of testing it on human
beings has yet occurred; witness has been denounced for this cruelty,
although pycrotoxine is much used for poisoned wheat; in each case the
animal dies in convulsions.”--_Dig. Ev. Roy. Com._, London, 1876, p. 25.


=Brown-Séquard, Charles Edouard=, Laboratory of Exper. Med., Collége de
France, Paris. B. at Mauritius, 1818. M.D. Paris, 1840; Prof. Med. Fac.,
Paris, 1869; Suc. Claude Bernard as Prof. Exper. Med. at College of
France.

Author of “Dual Character of the Brain,” Toner Lectures, Smithsonian
Institution; “Diseases of the Nerves,” Holmes’s System of Surgery, Vol.
III., 1860; Edit. of Archives of Scientific and Practical Med., New York;
“Advice to Students,” a lecture delivered at the opening of the Medical
Lectures, Harvard Univ., 1876; Lectures on the Physiology and Pathology
of the Central Nervous System, Roy. Coll. Surg. Eng., May, 1858; Lectures
on Diagnosis and Treatment of functional Nervous Affections, 1868, &c.,
Philadelphia, Cambridge, U.S., &c.

“The laying bare of the spinal cord, and its free exposition to the
action of the atmosphere, instead of being a cause or loss or diminution
of sensibility, as it had been said, seems to be followed by a marked
increase of sensibility in the parts of the body which are behind the
place where the cord is exposed.… Deep injuries to the posterior columns
of the spinal cord are always followed by a degree of hyperæsthesia
greater than after the laying bare of the nervous centres--hyperæsthesia
which appeared in all parts of the body behind the place injured.… Before
the operation in rabbits the most energetic pinching of the skin produces
agitation but no shrieking; after the operation, on the contrary the
least pinching produces shrieking and a much greater agitation. Sometimes
the hyperæsthesia is so considerable that the least pressure upon the
skin makes the animal shriek. Whether the operation is performed on the
lumbar, the dorsal, or the cervical region, the phenomena are always
the same--that is, there is manifest hyperæsthesia in the various parts
of the body which receive their nerves from the part of the spinal cord
which is behind the section. It has been so in all the animals I have
operated upon, and I have already made this experiment upon animals
belonging to more than twenty species. As long as the animals live after
the section of the posterior columns, hyperæsthesia continues to exist,
except in the cases where re-union takes place between the two surfaces
of the section; but hyperæsthesia is greater during the first week after
the operation than it is after a month or many months.”--_Brown-Séquard_,
“_Lancet_” 1,823 and 1,819.

M. Brown-Séquard has devoted his time since his graduation almost
exclusively to experimental investigations on physiological topics,
especially on the spinal column, the muscular system, the sympathetic
nerves and ganglions, and on the effect of the removal of the supra-renal
capsules, &c. Author of many Essays and Papers giving details of his
Experiments.


=Bruns, Paul Victor.= B. in Helmstedt, 1812. Stud. Tübingen, 1833; M.D.,
1837; Prof. Anat. College, Brunswick, 1839; Prof. Surg., Tübingen, 1840.

Author of “Handbuch der practischen Chirurgie,” Tübingen, 1854-60;
“Chirurgische Atlas,” Tübingen, 1853; “Die Durchschneidung der
Gesichtsnerven,” Tübingen, 1859; “Die Behandlung schlechtgeheilte
Beinbrüche,” Berlin, 1861; “Die erste Ausrottung eines Polypen in der
Kehlköpfröhre,” Tübingen, 1862; “Die Laryngoskopie,” Tübingen, 1862;
“Chirurgische Heilmittellehre,” Tübingen, 1868-73; “Arznei-operationen,”
Tübingen, 1869; “Die Galvano-Chirurgie,” Tübingen, 1870.


=Brunton, Thomas Lauder=, 50, Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, W. M.D.,
Edin., 1868; M.B. and C.M. (Honours and Gold Medal for Thesis), 1866;
B.Sc., 1867; D.Sc., 1870; F.R.C.P., Lond., 1876; M. 1870; (Univ. Edin.,
Vienna, Berlin, Amsterdam, and Leipsig); Baxter Nat. Sci. Schol., Univ.
Edin., 1868; F.R.S.; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc., Bot. Soc., and Med.
Soc., London; Mem. (late Sen. Pres.) Roy. Med. Soc., Edin.; Lect. on Mat.
Med. and Therap., and Asst. Phys. St. Barthol. Hosp.; Exam. in Mat. Med.,
Univ. Edin., and R.C.P., London; late Exam. in Mat. Med., Univ. London;
Member of the Association for the Advancement of Med. by Research.

Author of “On Digitalis, with some observations on Urine” (Prize
Thesis); “Experimental Investigation of the Action of Medicines;”
“Digestion and Secretion,” Sanderson’s Handbook for the Physiological
Laboratory; “Tables of Materia Medica; Pharmacology and its Relations
to Therapeutics,” Goulst. Lectures R.C.P., 1877; “Diabetes Mellitus,”
Reynolds’ Syst. of Med.; “Diabetes Insipidus,” _Ibid._; “The Bible
and Science;” Joint Author (with Sir Joseph Fayrer) of “Nature and
Physiological Action of the Poison of Indian Venomous Snakes,” Proc.
Roy. Soc., Contrib. “On the Use of Nitrite of Amyl in Angina Pectoris,”
_Lancet_, 1867; “On the Chemical Composition of the Nuclei of Blood
Corpuscles,” Journ. Anat. and Physiol., 1869; “On the Influence of
Temperature over the Pulsations of the Mammalian Heart and over the
Action of the Vagus,” St. Barthol. Hosp. Reports, and Papers in Philos.
Trans., &c.

“The number of animals required in experiments for research varies
enormously; has himself used in all about 150 animals of different kinds,
chiefly cats, because they are a convenient size, and cheaper than
rabbits. Dogs cannot be got; asks no questions as to how the cats are
obtained.”.… “Used 90 cats in the first series of investigations with
regard to cholera, describes the method pursued, and gives reasons for
it. No beneficial discovery has yet been arrived at; the experiments are
still proceeding.”--_Dig. Ev. Roy. Com._, London, 1876, pp. 38-9.

“Action of Inflammation.… For this purpose we curarise a frog and lay
it on a large plate of cork with a hole at one side, and another piece
of cork half an inch high at the other. We fix the body of the frog to
the raised piece, open its abdomen with a pair of scissors, draw out
the intestines, and fasten the mesentery with very fine pins over the
hole. In an hour and a half, or two hours afterwards, white corpuscles
come rapidly out of the vessels and wander over the field. We may
then inject our drug into the circulation, or apply it locally to the
mesentery.”--_Experimental Investigation into the action of Medicines_,
T. Lauder Brunton, London, 1875, p. 23.

_Held a License for Vivisection at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital Medical
School in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates in 1878 for Illustrations
of Lectures, for Experiments without Anæsthetics, and for Experiments
on Cats, Dogs, Horses, Mules and Asses; in 1879 Certificates for
Illustrations of Lectures and for Experiments without Anæsthetics
(this Certificate not acted upon); in 1880 and 1881 Certificates
for Illustrations of Lectures; in 1882 and 1883 Certificates for
Illustrations of Lectures and also for Experiments without Anæsthetics.
No experiments on Horses, Mules or Asses in either year._


=Budge, Julius= (Prof.) B. 1811. M.D. Berlin, 1833; (Univs. Marburg,
Wurzburg and Berlin); Prof. Anat. P. and Zoology Univ. Bonn, 1855;
Director of the Physiological Institute of Greifswald, 1856.

Author of “Untersuchungen über das Nervensystem,” Frankfort-on-the-Maine,
1841-42; “Handbuch der Physiologie,” 1875; “Allgemeine Pathologie als
Erfahrungswissenschaft basirt auf Physiologie,” Bonn, 1845; “Memoranda
der Speciellen Physiologie des Menschen,” Weimar, 1850; “Über die Zwecke
des Athems,” Weimar, 1860; “Compendium der Physiologie des Menschen,”
Leipsig, 1864; “Ueber den Schmerz,” Leipsig, 1866.

“From observations on human patients we have already learnt that pain
causes movements of the bladder. But we can also demonstrate this fact
experimentally. Not always, but in many instances I have seen that in
curarised animals in whom it is well known the sensibility of the nerves
long outlasts their mobility, that the pressure of the water rose when I
galvanized the trigeminal nerve, that is, if I placed the electrode on
the eye or on the mucous membrane of the nose, or when I irritated the
central end of a nervus vagus, which fact Oehl has also observed (C. r.
1865, II., p. 340). Also other sensitive nerves can occasion movements of
the bladder,”--“_Über die Reizbarkeit der Vorderen Rückenmarkstänge._”
Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. II., p. 515.


=Bufalini, Giovanni.= Prof. Siena University.

Author (with L. Luciani) of “Sol de Corso dell’ inanizione; récerche
Sperimentali;” Archives per le Scienze Mediche, Vol. V., p. 338.

Engaged with Luciani on experiments on inanition by the starvation of
dogs.--_Archiv. per le Scienze Mediche_, Vol V., p. 338.

“A very interesting contribution to the doctrine of inanition. The
authors present a graphic table, indicating the quantity of hæmoglobin
in the blood, the temperature, and, according to daily observations on
a bitch subjected for 43 days to an absolute fast with the exception of
one ration of water. At the last there were quick oscillations in the
temperature … an interesting fact, which deserves to be confirmed by
further experiments, which the authors engage to make. A second series
of experiments was made on fasting dogs, on which every three days was
practised the transfusion of blood.”--_Archives Italiennes_, Tom. II., p.
253.


=Burkart, Rudolph.= M.D. Bonn, 1869.

Author of “Die physiologische Diagnostic der Nervenkrankheiten,”
Leipsig, 1875. Contrib. “Ueber den Einfluss des N. Vagus auf die
Athemsbewegungen,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. I., p. 107; “Studien ueber
die automatische Thätigkeit des Athemcentrums, und ueber die Beziehungen
derselben zum nervus vagus und anderen athemnerven,” Ibid., Vol. XVI., p.
427.

The last-named article contains records of experiments on rabbits, such
as inducing cramp through loss of blood, experiments with electricity
on the nervus vagus dexter and nervus vagus sinister; the abdomen cut
open to expose the action of the diaphragm. (In Exp. VII., after a
continuation of the electrical excitement for 2h. 20m., the action of the
diaphragm ceased.) Experiments on frogs are also recorded.


=Cadiat= (Dr.), 7, Rue du Bac, Paris. Agrégé Histol. Practical Courses.


=Capparelli, A.=, M.D. Lab. Physiol. Turin.

Experiment on the bladders of dogs and rabbits. Some dogs under
chloroform; others curarized.--Communicated to Academy of Medicine,
Turin, June, 1882.


=Cash, John Theodore.= M.D. Edin. (Gold Medal), 1879. M.B. and C.M.,
1876; M.R.C.S. England, 1876; (Edin., Berlin, Vienna, and Leipsig); Lab.
St. Barthol., London.

_Held a License for Vivisection at St. Bartholomew Hospital Medical
School in 1880-81-82-83. Certificate for Illustrations of Lectures in
1882-83. No experiments returned in 1881. Dr. Cash can also perform
experiments at the Physiological Laboratory, King’s College, London, and
at the Brown Institution, Wandsworth Road._


=Cerradini, Giulio.= Prof. Univ. of Genoa.


=Chambard= (Dr.), 97, Rue Saint-Lazare, Paris. Phys. Hosp. Mental Dis.


=Charcot, Jean Martin=, Paris. B. 1825. M.D. Paris, 1853; Phys. to La
Salpétrière; Prof. Med. Faculty, Paris; Mem. Acad. of Med., Director of
“Archives de Physiologie.”

Author of “De l’Expectation en Médecine,” Paris, 1857; “De la Pneumonie
chronique,” Paris, 1860; “La Médecine empirique et la Médecine
scientifique,” Paris, 1867; “Leçons cliniques sur les maladies des
vicillards et les maladies chroniques,” Paris, 1868; “Leçons sur les
maladies du système nerveux,” 1873; “Leçons sur les maladies du foie;
des voies biliaires et des reins,” 1877; Joint Editor of “Archives de
Physiologie.” Contrib. “Galvanism and Hypnotism,” Brit. Med. Journ.


=Charles, T. W. Cranstoun=, St. Thomas’ Hospital, London, S.E. M.D. and
M. Ch. (with 1st of 1st Honours and Gold Medal), Qu. Univ. Irel., 1869
(Belf., Dub., Lond., Paris, etc.); 1st Schol. Qu. Coll. Belfast, 1865-69;
Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path. Soc.; Lect. on Pract. Physiol.
St. Thomas’s Hosp. Med. Sch.; late Med. Regist. and Demonst. of Physiol.
St. Thomas’ Hosp.; formerly Demonst. and Asst. Lect. in Chem. Qu. Coll.,
Belfast. Contrib. “Medical Reports of St. Thomas’s Hosp.,” etc., etc.

_Held a license for Vivisection at St. Thomas’s Hospital Physiological
Laboratory in 1878 and 1879. No experiments returned in 1879._


=Chauveau, A.=, 22, Quai des Brotteaux, Lyons. Chef des Travaux
d’Anatomie et de physiologie à l’école Vétérinaire de Lyons.

Author of “De l’excitabilité de la moëlle épinière;” “Du nerf
pneumogastrique,” &c.

Describes his own experiments in Brown-Séquard’s _Journal de
Physiologie_. The object was “to ascertain the excitability of the spinal
marrow, and the convulsions and pain produced by that excitability.”
His studies were made almost exclusively on horses and asses, who “lend
themselves marvellously thereto by the large volume of their spinal
marrow,” and he “consecrated 80 subjects to his purpose.” “The animal
is fixed on a table; an incision is made on its back of from thirty
to thirty-five centimetres; the vertebræ are opened with the help of
chisel, mallet, and pincers, and the spinal marrow exposed.” No mention
of anæsthetics. Case 7. A vigorous mule. “When one pricks the marrow
near the line of emergence of the sensitive nerves, the animal manifests
the most violent pain.… Case 10. A small ass very thin, pricked on the
line of emergence--_douleur intense_. Case 20. Old white horse lying on
the litter, unable to rise, but nevertheless very sensitive. At whatever
point I scratch the posterior cord, I provoke signs of the most violent
suffering.”--_Journal de Physiologie_, Vol. IV., No. XIII., p. 48.


=Cheyne, Wm. Watson=, 6, Old Cavendish Street, Cavendish Square, London,
W. M.B. Edin., and C.M. (1st Class Honours), 1875; F.R.C.S., Eng. (Exam.)
1879; (Edin., Vienna, and Strasbourg); Syme Surg. Fell., 1877; Boylston
Med. Prizeman and Gold Medallist, 1880; Jacksonian Prizeman, 1881; Fell.
Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path. Soc; Asst. Surg., King’s Coll. Hosp.;
Demonst. of Surg. King’s Coll.; Late Surg. Regist., King’s Coll. Hosp.;
Demonst. Anat., Univ. Edin.; House Surg., Edin. Roy. Infirm. and King’s
Coll. Hosp., London.

Author of “Antiseptic Surgery, its Principles, Practice, History and
Results,” 1881; Art. “On the Antiseptic Method of Treating Wounds,”
_Internat. Encyl. Surg._ Contribs. to Brit. Med. Journ., and Lond. Med.
Record, &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection at King’s College, London Physiological
Laboratory, also Certificates Dispensing with Obligation to Kill in
1880-81-82-83._

“Two tubes of serum containing micrococci were obtained from M.
Toussaint, who holds that micrococci are the cause of the disease.
Toussaint obtains the organisms by inoculation of flasks containing
serum, or infusion of rabbit with the blood of tuberculous animals;
and he has in some cases succeeded in producing tuberculosis by the
injection of these cultivations into other animals. The material obtained
from M. Toussaint was injected into three rabbits, two guinea-pigs,
one cat, and one mouse, and of these seven animals six were under
observation for a sufficient length of time for the development at
least of local tuberculosis. In no instance did tuberculosis ensue.
(In all the experiments detailed in this report inoculation was made
into the anterior chamber of the eye whenever this was practicable;
syringes purified by heat were employed for the purpose.) Cultivations
of these micrococci were also made, and injected into nine rabbits, and
three guinea-pigs. Of these, four rabbits and three guinea-pigs were
under observation for a considerable time without the development of
tuberculosis in any case. The total result is that thirteen animals
were inoculated with the micrococci with which Toussaint works, and
obtained from Toussaint himself, and in no case did tuberculosis
occur.”--_Lancet_, March 17, 1883, pp. 444-5.

“_Experiment. V., November 7th, 1882._--Experiment with pus from the
wound of a patient suffering from pyæmia. The pus was thick and foul
smelling.

“1. One minim was injected _into the left eye_ of a rabbit. Panophthalmos
[inflammation of the eye, involving every part of it] resulted and the
animal was ill for some time. It, however, gradually recovered, and in
December was apparently well. It died on January 10th, 1883. Lived 64
days.” (P. 267.)

“_Experiment XIV., November 2nd, 1882._--The bacilli were rubbed up
with boiled distilled water as usual. A little of the pure material was
injected _into the right eyes_ of three rabbits. Into the _left eyes_ the
following materials were injected:--

“No. 1.--One part of the fluid containing bacilli was mixed with one part
of a 1 per 1,000 watery solution of bichloride of mercury. This mixture
was allowed to stand for twelve minutes, and then injected into the left
eye of No. 1.

“_Result in No. 1._--On November 23rd, 1882, it was found there was a
well-developed tubercular iritis [inflammation of the iris--the coloured
part of the eye surrounding the pupil] in the right eye, but apparently
nothing in the left. On December 10th, 1882, the left eye was beginning
to show appearances of tubercular iritis; the right eye become converted
into a caseous [cheese-like] mass. This animal died on January 7th, 1883.
Lived 66 days.” (P. 285.)--“Report to the Association for the Advancement
of Medicine by Research.”--_Practitioner_, April, 1883.


=Chirone, Vincenzo.= Prof. at Palermo.

Engaged with Curci in experiments on biological action of pirotoxine and
cinchonidine.

Author of “Contribuzione sperimentale alla storia del Gloralio,
Opuscolo,” Napoli, 1870; “Manuale di Materia medica e di Terapia,
compilato secondo gli ultimi progressi della scienza,” Napoli,
1871--Presso V. Pasquale, nella R. Università; “Sul valore febbrifugo
della chinina; studii sperimentali e clinici, Memoria di concorso, con
medaglia di 1ᵃ categoria dalla Facoltá medica di Napoli, 1872”--Presso
l’Autore; “Se la dilatazione patologica del cuore avvenga durante
la diastole, Lettera al Prof. L. Luciani (Lo Sperimentale),” 1873;
“L’infezione malarica e l’azione della chinina del Prf. Cantani.
Considerazioni critiche (Lo Sperimentale),” 1873; “Meccanismo di azione
della chinina sulla circolazione ed azione sulla fibra muscolare in
generale. Esperienze eseguite nel laboratorio del Prof. A. Bernard nel
Giardino della Piante, in Parigi;” “Parte prima (Lo Sperimentale), 1874;
parte seconda (Lo Sperimentale),” 1875; “Mécanisme de l’action de la
quinine sur la circulation. Recherches expérimentales, executées au
Muséum d’Histoire Naturelle,” Paris, 1875--Masson éditeurs; “Due parole
sul nesso naturale tra le funzioni del pulmone e quelle del cuore.
Lettera al Prof. F. Pacini (Lo Sperimentale),” 1874; “Due parole sull’
iniezione nelle vene dell’ idrato dictoralis. Lettera al Prof. Cav. Carlo
Ghinozzi (Lo Sperimentale),” 1875; “Ricerche sperimentali sull’ azione
biologica della ciclamina. Comunicazione preventiva (La Clinica),” 1876;
“Azione comparativa degli alcooli omologhi ottenuti per fermentazione.
Lezione dettata nella R. Università di Napoli, raccolta e redatta da
Gaetano Materazzo (Lo Sperimentale),” 1876; “La doppia attivitá muscolare
e l’azione della chinina. Critica e sperimenti, Risposta ai Dott. A.
Mosso e L. Pagliani (La Rivista clinica di Bologna),” 1876; “Due parole
di risposta alla lettera dei Dott. A. Mosso e L. Pagliani (L’Osservatore,
Gazzetta delle cliniche di Torino),” 1876; “Ricerche sperimentali sull’
azione biologica della Ciclamina (Renditonto della R. Accademia delle
Scienze fisiche e matematiche di Napoli, fasc, di giugno),” 1877; “Azione
fisiologica della chinina sulla circolazione del sangue, Esperienze fatte
nel laboratorio di Fisiologia dell’ Università di Bruxelles” (1876),
dal Dott. Leone Stiénon. “Rivista critica (Lo Sperimentale),” 1876;
“La Scienza e l’arte del ricettare, manuale pratico per gli studenti,
pei medici e pei farmacisti.” Napoli, 1877, Presso l’Autore, L. 10;
Collaborazione all’ “Enciclopedia Medica Italiana,” Articoli, Bettonica,
Bezoardo, Bile, Brodo (monografia), Cainea, Calabar (Fava del),
Calaguala, Calamo aromatico, Cammomilla, Campegio, Cedron, Cera, Cerato,
Cerfoglio, Chelidonia, Chenopodio, Chermes animale, China (monografia),
Chiodi di garofano, Cibozio, Cicoria, Circuta (monografia), Cioccolatte
medicinali, Cloralio (monografia).


=Chossat, Charles Etienne.= B. 1796. M.D., Paris, 1820. Prof. Univ.
Geneva. Mem. Soc. Nat. Geneva.

Author of “Recherches expérimentales sur l’inanition,” Paris, 1843; “De
l’Influence du système nerveux sur la chaleur animale,” Paris, 1823.

“… During all the operations, and in a great number of thermometrical
observations, the animal has been placed upon its back, the fore and hind
feet secured to make certain that the body should remain motionless.
This position, which is extremely convenient for the experimenter, is
no doubt far less so for the animal experimented upon.… As Legallois
had affirmed, probably from the results of his own experiments on
rabbits, ‘that by tying an animal down on its back its temperature may
be sufficiently lowered so as even to cause death, if it is kept long
enough in that position,’ I thought I ought to repeat that experiment by
prolonging its duration.”--_Mémoire sur l’Influence du Système Nerveux
sur la Chaleur Animale_, Paris, 1820, pp. 11 and 12.

“After long and conscientious researches, M. Chossat concluded that the
sympathetic nerve is the real heat-producing agent in animals. But if,
after having cut the brain transversely in front of the pons varolis,
after having suppressed all nervous action by a cerebral shock violent
enough to cause death, after having cut both the pneumo-gastric nerves,
after having made various sections of the spinal cord, after having
dissected out the sympathetic nerve above the solary plexus, after having
practised ligature of the aorta below the diaphragm; if after all this,
the temperature of the animals submitted to these mutilations has been
lowered and they have died, notwithstanding that pains were taken to keep
up artificial breathing when natural respiration was becoming impossible,
it cannot be right to affirm that these animals died from the effects of
cold. In the experiments made by M. Chossat, the decreased temperature
was evidently the consequence and not the cause of death.”--Gavarret,
Art. “_Chaleur Animale_” _Dict. des Sciences Médicales_, Vol. XV., 1874,
p. 27.

“M. Chossat and M. Strelzoff (very recently) have made experiments on
pigeons, turtle-doves, hens, guinea-pigs, rabbits, and cats, and have
arrived at this result--that the animals die when they have lost in
weight thirty per cent., that is to say, one-third of their original
weight.”… “M. Chossat subjected twelve animals to complete deprivation
of food and drink, and abandoned them thus until they died. He examined
them all every twenty-four hours at noon and at midnight.”--Gavarret’s
“_Animal Heat_” p. 394.


=Chudzinski= (Prof.), Paris. Professor at the Institute of Anthropology.


=Ciaccio= (Prof.), Bologna. Scuola Veterinaria.


=Ciniselli, Giuseppe.= Prof. Pavia University.


=Cleland, John=, 2, The College, Glasgow. M.D. Edin., 1856; L.R.C.S.
Edin., 1856; F.R.S.; Prof. of Anat. Univ. Glasgow; formerly Prof. of
Anat. and Physiol. and Clin. Lect. Qu. Coll. Galway.

Author of “Animal Physiology,” 1874; “Directory for the Dissection of the
Human Body,” 1876. Contrib. to Philos. Trans. and various other papers.


=Coats, Joseph=, 7, Elmbank Crescent, Glasgow, N.B. M.D. Glasgow, 1870;
M.B. (Honours), 1867; F.F.P.S. Glasg., 1872; (Univ. Glasg., Leipsig, and
Wurzburg); Hon. Sec. Med. Chir. Soc. Glasg. and Glasg. Br. Brit. Med.
Assoc.; Mem. (late Pres.) Path. and Chir. Soc., Glasg.; Lect. on Path.
and Pathologist Glasg. Western Infirm.; Exam. in Path. Univ. Glasg.;
Editor of Glasg. Med. Journal. Contrib. “Arbeit des Herzens,” Ludwig’s
Arb., 1869; “Results of some Injections of Kidneys in Bright’s Disease,”
Glas. Med. Journ., 1875, etc. etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the University of Glasgow
Physiological Laboratory 1878 and 1879; also in 1882 with Certificate
dispensing with obligation to kill. No experiments in 1882._


=Cocco-Pisano, Adolfo.= Prof. Sassari University.


=Cohnheim, Julius.= B. 1839, at Demmin, Pomerania; d. Aug. 14, 1884.
Leipsig University Path. Institute. M.D. Berlin (Univs. Berlin, Wurzburg,
Greifswald, and Prague); Assist. to Virchow at Path. Inst. Berlin, 1864;
Prof. Path. Anat. at Kiel, 1868; Prof. Path. Anat. at Breslau, 1872,
where was founded under his direction a new Pathological Institute.
Accepted the Professorship of Gen. Path. and Anatomy at Leipsic, 1876.

Author of numerous articles in Medical Journals, “Lectures on General
Pathology,” 1871; joint author with Dr. Anton von Schultheis Rechberg,
of Zurich, of “Ueber die Folgen der Kranzarterienverschliessung für das
Herz.”

Made experiments, in conjunction with Prof. Roy (_whom see_) “to
elucidate a number of questions bearing upon the relation which exists
between certain diseases of the kidney and cardiac hypertrophy.”

“If we now try to explain the striking phenomena which so invariably
accompany our experiments, it is quite impossible not to conclude from
the outset that they are the result of the closing of the coronary
artery. It is quite true that less frequent beating of the heart, and
even irregularities of the pulse, may occur spontaneously, and certainly
without ligature of the coronary artery. Any one who has made frequent
experiments on dogs in which the pressure of the blood has been noted
down during a long period, knows very well that intermittent pulsation,
and even greater irregularities, are not unfrequent occurrences in
narcotised and bound or curarised animals--irregularities which disappear
or re-appear, as the case may be. But the sudden ceasing of the diastolic
beating of the heart may also occasionally be observed in dogs whose
coronary arteries have not been touched. However, this only happens
spontaneously (according to our experience) in dogs which have already
been used for a long succession of experiments, which have resulted
in the natural alteration of the action of the heart, and in whom the
arterial pressure has been lowered to a great degree, more especially
when for hours the thorax has been open, and experiments have been made
on the greater vessels, or the functions of the heart, or on pericardial
pressure, etc.… However, there can be no question that the manipulations
of the heart, which are inseparable from our experiments, should be the
cause of this result.” … (Here M. Cohnheim makes this naif remark), “Many
observers have expressed surprise at the amount of pain which a dog’s
heart can bear!”--“_Ueber die Folgen der Krauzarterienver schliessung für
das Herz_,” Virchow’s _Archiv._, Vol. 85, 1881, pp. 520-21.

“The great majority of our experiments were made on dogs under curari
with artificial respiration, but several were under morphia; with
rabbits there is no particular difficulty in dispensing with all
narcotics.”--Virchow’s _Archiv._


=Colasanti, Joseph.= M.D. Univ. Rome.

Author of “Researches on Uric Acid,” Atti della R. Accademia di Roma,
1881; “Action of Oxygenated Water in Poisoning Dogs;” “Zur Kenntniss der
Physiologischen Wirkungen des Curaregiftes,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol.
XVI., pp. 157-8, &c.

Made experiments with curare at the Physiological Institute at Bonn. “…
For these experiments we used middle-sized dogs, with well developed
muscles and little fat. The method of preparing them for the desired
experiments was as follows:--The dog was fastened on to the vivisection
table. The abdomen was opened by a long cut in the linea alba from the
sternum to the symphysis oss. pub.; to the right and left of the linea
alba the muscles of the skin and abdomen were cut across and separated,
so as to leave space for the preparation of the aorta abdominalis and
the vena cava ascendens. Both these vessels were dissected out of their
sheaths, and the threads required for binding the canula passed under the
artery. While the animal bleeds to death a canula, which is intended to
supply defibrinised blood, is fixed into the aorta.…”--“_Zur Kenntniss
der Physiologischen Wirkungen des Curaregiftes._”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._,
Vol. XVI., pp. 157-8.


=Colin, Gabriel Constant.= B. at Mollars, Haute Saône, 1825. Prof.
Veterinary College, Alfort. Mem. Acad. of Med., Paris.

Author of “Expériences sur la secretion pancréatique chez les grands
ruminants,” 1851; “Traité de physiologie comparée des animaux,” 1854-56;
“Recherches sur une maladie vermineuse des moutons, due à la présence
d’une linguitale dans les ganglions mésentériques,” 1861. Contrib. a
number of articles to the “Receuil de Méd. Vétérinaire;” “les Annales des
Sciences Naturelles,” “Les Comptes Rendus de l’Acad. des Sciences, &c.”

“The following are experiments practised by Messrs. Boulay and
Colin:--Starve a horse, make an open wound in the æsophagus, and inject
thirty grains of alcoholic extract of nux vomica, or from three to four
grains of strychnine. At the end of a quarter of an hour the horse will
die in characteristic convulsions.”--_Traité de Physiologie_, Béclard, p.
155.


=Cornil, André Victor=, 6, Rue de Seine, Paris. B. 1837. M.D. Paris,
1865, Prof. of Path. Med. Faculty; Physician to the Hospital de Lourcine.

Author of “Manuel d’histologie pathologique,” 1869-72; “Leçons
élémentaires d’hygiène,” 1872; Editor (chief) of “Journal des
Connaisances Médicales.” Joint author with M. Ranvier of “Manuel
d’Histologie Pathologique.”


=Corona, Augusto= (Prof.) Director of Sassari University.


=Corrado= (Commandatore), Rome. Professor of Physiological Pathology
Hospital of San Spirito.


=Couty= (Mons.), Rio Janeiro.


=Coyne, Paul,= M.D., Paris. Formerly Resident Hospital Physician. Prof.
Med. Faculty, Lille. Director of the Laboratory of Histology of the
Hospital La Charité, Paris.

Author of “Recherches sur l’Anatomie normale de la muqueuse des larynx et
sur l’anatomie pathologique des complications laryngeés de la rougeole,”
Paris, 1874. Contrib. to Gaz. Med. de Paris.


=Cryan, Robert,= 54, Rutland Square West, Dublin. F.K.Q.C.P. Irel., 1873;
L. 1849; L.M. 1861; L.R.C.S.T. 1847 (Richm. Hosp., Carm. Sch. Dub. and
Univ. Glasg.); Phys. St. Vincent’s Hosp.; Prof. Anat. and Physiol. Cath.
Univ.; M.R.T.A. Mem. Med. Soc., Coll. Phys. Irel., Surg. Soc. Irel. and
Path. and Obst. Socs. Dub.; late Lect. on Anat. and Physiol. Carm. Sch.

Author of various Contributions to Path. Soc. Dub.; _Dub. Quart. Journ.,
and Med. Press and Circular_.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the Physiological Laboratory of
Catholic University, Dublin, in 1878, and Certificate for Illustrations
of Lectures._


=Cunningham, Daniel John=, University, Edinburgh. M.D. Edin. (Gold
Medal), 1876; M.B. and C.M. (1st Class Honours) 1874, Edin.; F.R.S.,
Edin.; Senior Demonstrator of Anat. (late Asst. and Junior Demonst. of
Anat.), Univ. Edin.; Lect. on Physiol. Roy. Vet. Coll., Edin.

Author of “Dissector’s Guide,” Parts I. and II. Contrib. several Articles
to _Journ. Anat. and Physiology_, etc.

_Held License for Vivisection at the Veterinary College, Clyde Street,
Edinburgh, in 1878, 1879, 1880, 1881, and 1882. Certificates for
Illustrations to Lectures in 1879, 1880, 1881, 1882. No experiments in
1878, 1880, and 1882._


=Curci= (Signor).

Engaged with Chirone in experiments on pirotoxine and
cinchonidine.--_Archiv. Ital._


=Currie, Andrew Stark=, Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh. M.B. Edin., 1874;
M.R.C.S., Eng., 1874.

_Held License for Vivisection at Glasgow University Physiological
Laboratory, 1878._


=Cyon, Elias de=, 99, Boulevard Haussmann, Paris. Prof. Physiology Univ.
St. Petersburg; Mem. Acad. of Med. St. Petersburg.

Author of “Die Lehre von der Tabes dorsualis kritisch und experimentelle
erläutert,” Berlin, 1867; “Principes d’électrothérapie,” Paris, 1867;
“Methodik der physiologischen Experimente und Vivisectionen, mit Atlas,”
Giessen, Leipsig, 1876; “Recherches expérimentales sur les fonctions des
canaux semi-circulaires et sur leur rôle dans la formation de la notion
de l’espace,” Paris, 1878; Bibl. de l’École des Hautes Études, section
des Sciences Nat., Vol. XVIII., Art. 1--(Experiments on pigeons, dogs,
rabbits, and lampreys made in the laboratory of Claude Bernard.)

Experimented in his private Laboratory at St. Petersburg in 1874; also in
Ludwig’s Laboratory at Leipsig; in his own Laboratory, and that of Claude
Bernard, at Paris. To observe the action excited by barometrical pressure
upon the organism, he placed animals in the iron cylinder invented by
Paul Bert, but improved upon the latter in such a way that the arteries
of the animal were brought into communication with a manometer placed
outside, and the nerves of the animal could be acted upon by an electric
current.

… “The effect of such a division of the semi-circular canals is
appalling. It is impossible to convey any exact idea of the unceasing
movements of the pigeon; it can neither stand, nor lie down, nor fly,
nor perform any systematic movements whatever, nor retain for an instant
even any position in which it may be placed.…. To keep alive pigeons
which have been thus operated upon I have wrapped them in a napkin, so
as to prevent even oscillations of the head. Thus pinioned I placed
them in a hammock, specially constructed for pigeons having had the
semi-circular canals severed. Notwithstanding these precautions, it has
frequently happened that I have found the pigeons dead in a corner of
the laboratory.… So violent were the muscular contractions, that though
enfolded in a napkin, the pigeons still managed to throw themselves out
of the hammock, and roll on to the ground till fatal injuries to the
brain ended their sufferings.”--“Functions des canaux,” etc.; _Bibl. de
l’École des Hautes Études, Section des Sciences Naturelles_, Vol. XVIII.,
pp. 45-46.

“The medical man who speaks with horror of the torture of animals in
physiological experiments, will do well to remember how often he has
prescribed most repulsive, and not always safe treatment for a patient,
in order to obtain some insight into how it was likely to act. Many a
surgical operation is performed, _less for the benefit of the patient
than for the service of science;_ and the utility of the knowledge
aimed at thereby is often _much more trifling_ than that attained by
Vivisection of an animal.”--_Methodik_, p. 8.

“The true vivisector must approach a difficult vivisection with the
same joyful excitement, with the same delight, with which a surgeon
undertakes a difficult operation, from which he expects extraordinary
consequences. He who shrinks from cutting into a living animal, he who
approaches a vivisection as a disagreeable necessity, may very likely be
able to repeat one or two vivisections, but will never become an artist
in vivisection. He who cannot follow some fine nerve-thread, scarcely
visible to the naked eye, into the depths, if possible sometimes tracing
it to a new branching, with joyful alertness for hours at a time; he
who feels no enjoyment when at last, parted from its surroundings and
isolated, he can subject that nerve to electrical stimulation; or
when, in some deep cavity, guided only by the sense of touch of his
finger-ends, he ligatures and divides an invisible vessel--to such a
one there is wanting that which is most necessary for a successful
vivisector. The pleasure of triumphing over difficulties held hitherto
insuperable is always one of the highest delights of the vivisector.
And the sensation of the physiologist, when from a gruesome wound, full
of blood and mangled tissue, he draws forth some delicate nerve-branch,
and calls back to life a function which was already extinguished--this
sensation has much in common with that which inspires a sculptor,
when he shapes forth fair living forms from a shapeless mass of
marble.”--_Methodik_, 1876, p. 15.

“The description given by Cyon of the method of operation (_Methodik_,
p. 510) is as follows: ‘The rabbit is firmly fastened to the ordinary
vivisecting table by means of Czermak’s holder. Then the rabbit’s
head is held by the left hand, so that the thumb of that hand rests on
the condyle of the lower jaw. This is used as a _point d’appui_ for
the insertion of the knife.… To reach the hollow of the temple the
instrument must be guided forward and upward, thus avoiding the hard
portion of the temporal bone and leading the knife directly into the
cranial cavity.… The trigeminus then comes under the knife. Now holding
the head of the animal very firmly, the blade of the knife is directed
backwards and downwards, and pressed hard in this direction against the
base of the skull. The nerve is then generally cut behind the Gasserian
ganglion, which is announced by a violent cry of agony (_einen heftigen
Schmerzensschrei_) of the animal.’”

“When I published my treatise on physiological methods and the art of
vivisection four years ago, several of my colleagues of the English
Universities entreated me not to announce my work in any of the English
newspapers, as they feared that public opinion might be still more
aroused.”--Letter to the _Gaulois_, December, 1881.


=Czermak, Johann Nepomuk.= B. at Prague in Bohemia, 1828; Med. and Chir.
Doct.; formerly Prof. Univs. Cracow and Pesth; Prof. Univ. Prague, 1860;
Prof. Physiol. Univ. Jena, 1865; Prof. Univ. Leipsig, 1870; founded
Physiological Laboratories in each of the above Universities; inventor of
the laryngoscope, and also of several instruments for securing animals
during vivisection.

Author of “Beschreibung einiger Vorrichtungen zu physiologischen
Zwecken,” Vienna, 1865; “Nachweis der Erscheinung der sogenannten
Pulsverspätung beim Frosche, und das Verfahren der selbe wahrzunehmen,”
Vienna, 1865; “Populäre physiologische vorträge gehalten im akademischen
Rosensaale zu Jena,” 1867-1869; “Die Physiologie als allgemeines
Bildungselement,” Leipsig, 1870; “Ueber Schopenhauer’s Theorie der
Farbe,” Vienna, 1870; “Der electrische Doppelhebel,” Leipsig, 1871;
“Ueber das Herz u. den Einfluss des Nervensystems auf dasselbe,” Leipsig,
1871; “Nachweiss echter hypnotischen Erscheinungen bei Thieren,”
Vienna, 1873; “Ueber das Ohr und das Hören;” “Ueber das physiologische
Privat-Laboratorium an der Universität Leipsig,” Leipsig, 1873.


=Dareste, Camille,= 37, Rue de Fleurus, Paris. M.D. Paris, 1847; Prof.
Nat. Hist., Lyceum of Versailles; Prof. Zool., Fac. Sci. Lille, 1864;
Direct. of Lab. of Teratology Med. Fac., Paris.

Author of “Recherches sur la production artificielle des monstruosités ou
Essais de tératogénie expérimentale,” 1877 (with maps). M. Dareste has
made a special study of Animal Monstrosities, and articles by him on this
subject have appeared in several journals, including the “Comptes Rendus
of the Académie des Sciences.”


=Dastre= (Prof.), Paris. D. Sc.; Prof. Nat. Hist. Lycée Louis le Grand;
Prof. (Suppléant) of Physiol. Fac. Sci.; Prof. of Physiol., La Sorbonne,
Paris.

Has translated from the English “Des lésions des nerfs et leurs
conséquences,” by Dr. Weir-Mitchell; Edited “Chaleur Animale,” by Claude
Bernard.


=Davidson, Alex. Dyce=, 224, Union Street, Aberdeen. M.A. Aberd., 1863;
M.D. 1870; M.B. and C.M. (both with highest Honours), 1866; M.R.C.S.
Eng., 1866; (Univ. Aberd. and Paris); Lect. on Opth. Surg. and
Ophthalmoscopy Univ. Aberd.; Opth. Surg. Roy. Infirm. Aberdeen; Surg.
Aberd. Opth. Inst. Blind Asyl., and Female Orphan Inst.; Professor of
Materia Medica Univ. Aberdeen; Phys. Hosp. for Incurables. Contrib.
several Papers, etc., to Annales d’Oculietique and other journals.

_Held License for Vivisection unrestricted as to place in 1878, also in
1881-82-83. Certificate for Experiments without Anæsthetics in 1878;
Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures in 1881-82-83._


=Davison, James=, 45, Sandy’s Terrace, South Circular Road, Dublin. M.D.
Qu. Univ. Ireland, 1869 (Belfast and Dublin).

_Held License for Vivisection at Physiological Room, Royal College of
Surgeons, Ireland, and 45, Sandy’s Terrace, Dublin, 1881, and at the
Laboratory, Drimatergh House, Queen’s County, 1883._


=Deahna, Dr. A.= Prof. Physiol. at Freiburg, in Bresgau; Phys. on Staff
of Saxon Sanitary Corps, 1879.

Joint author (with Dr. Joh. Latschenberger) of “Beiträge zur Lehre von
der reflectorischen Erregung der Gefässemuskeln,” Pflüger’s _Archiv_,
Vol. XII., p. 157.

Experiments on rabbits, dogs, and cats. The animals were all curarised,
and had various nerves cut and excited by electricity.


=De Paoli, Giovanni.= Prof. Genoa University.


=Descoust= (Dr.), 16, Rue Hérold, Paris. Prof, of Pract. Med. Jurisp.
Med. Faculty.


=Desfossez= (Dr.), Boulogne-sur-Seine. Phys. Hosp. Ophthalmology.


=Desgranges= (Dr.), 55, Place de la République, Lyons. Prof. of Surgery
Med. Faculty.


=Dittmar, Carl.= M.D. 1867, Phys. at Hildesheim; Mem. of Acad. of Sci. of
Saxony.

Author of “Ueber die Lage der sogenannten Gefässnervencentrums in
der Medulla oblongata;” “Ein neuer Beweiss für die Reizbarkeit der
centripetalen Fasern des Rückenmarks” (Ber. der. Sächs. Gessellschaft d.
Wiss., 1870).


=Donders, Frans-Cornelius.= B. 1818. Studied at the Military Medical
School of Utrecht. Was Military Surgeon at the Hospital of Hague.
Professor of Physiol., Histol., and Ophthalmol. at the University of
Utrecht, 1847. In 1863 received from his Government a grant of money
for the construction of a modern Physiological Laboratory, which was
inaugurated 1867. Corr. Mem. Academy of Medicine, Paris, 1873, and
Institute of France, 1879.

Author of “Lehre von den Augenbewegungen,” 1847; “Onder Zockingen gedaan
in het physiologisch laboratorium,” etc., Utrecht, 1849, 1857, 1867,
etc.; and of several articles in Graefe’s “Archiv. für Ophthalmologie.”

“MM. Snellon and Donders took a rabbit, cut the nerve on the right side
of the cervical region, made a wound in each ear, and inserted a fragment
of glass into the sore, which was then sewn up. At the end of six days a
tumour was set up in the left ear. At the end of twelve days the wound
on the right ear was opened by tearing its borders.… In the other ear
meanwhile the swelling had considerably increased, and a vast purulent
abscess was formed in its interior.… Here are some more curious results.
Cut the right nerve in the neck of a rabbit, and when the vessels of
the globe of the eye are dilated pour concentrated acetic acid on both
eyes. The sight is instantly violently distressed; the epithelium being
cauterised soon becomes detached, … and at the end of four weeks the
pupil of the eye can no longer be seen.”--_Traité de Physiologie_,
Béclard, 1862, p. 1,019.


=Dowdeswell, George Francis=, Physiol. Lab. New Museum, Oxford. M.A.,
F.C.S., F.R.S., &c.

Contrib. “On the structural changes which are produced in the liver under
the influence of the Salts of Vanadium,” “Journal of Physiology,” Vol.
I., Nos. 4 & 5, p. 257.

_Held License for Vivisection at Brown Institution, and University
College Physiological Laboratory in 1878-79-80; also at Cambridge
University Physiological Laboratory, besides former places in 1881-82-83.
Certificates for Experiments without Anæsthetics in 1878 and 1879;
Certificate Dispensing with obligation to kill in 1880; Certificates
for Experiments without anæsthetics, and for Experiments on Cats, Dogs,
Horses, Mules, and Asses in 1881-83, and Certificates for Illustrations
of Lectures, and for Experiments on Cats, Dogs, Horses, Mules, or Asses
in 1882. No Experiments returned in 1878, 1879, and 1880. No Experiments
on Horses, Mules, or Asses._


=Du Bois Reymond, Emil.= B. Berlin, 1818. Studied Geology at Bonn;
Anatomy and Physiology at Berlin under J. Müller; Ph. D. 1843 (Bonn and
Berlin); Prof. Physiol. Univ. Berlin (successor to J. Müller), 1858; Mem.
and Perpetual Sec. of Imp. Acad. of Science, Berlin, 1867.

Author of “Untersuchungen ueber thierische Elektricität,” Berlin, 1848,
etc.; “Ueber Thierische Bewegung,” Berlin, 1851; “Ueber die Grenzen des
Naturerkennens,” Leipsig, 1872; “Abhandlungen über allgemeine Muskel und
Nervenphysik,” 1877; “Der physiologische Unterricht sonst und jetzt,”
Berlin, 1878; “Culturgeschichte und Naturwissenschaft,” Leipsig, 1878.
Since 1857, co-editor, with Reichart, of Müller’s Archives of Anatomy.

In 1841 he experimented on animal electricity, and published the results
in “Poggendorf’s Annals” (1843).

It was Du Bois Reymond who said: “Standing on the loftiest summit of
Doubt, the man of science bravely disdains to fill the yawning desert
around him with phantoms of his imagination. He looks without terror into
the merciless machinery of Nature, utterly devoid as it is of any spark
of Deity.”--_Dr. Nordwall’s Address to Scandinavian League_, 1883.


=Du Castel= (Dr.), 14, Rue de Bellechasse, Paris. Phys. Hospital, Teuon.


=Durham, Arthur Edward=, 82, Brook Street, W. F.R.C.S. Eng. (Exam.),
1860; M. 1858 (Guy’s) 1st M.B. 1857; Prizem. 1854, Univ. Lond.; F.L.S.,
F.Z.S.; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Chairm. Bd. of Exam. R.C.S. Eng.;
Mem. Path. Clin. and Hunt. Socs.; Surg. and Lect. on Surg.; late Lect. on
Anat. and Lect. on Use of Microscope, Guy’s Hosp.; Con. Surg. St. Alban’s
Hosp. and Disp.; late Demonst. of Anat., Lect. on Nat. Philos., and Surg.
Regist. Guy’s Hosp.; late Pres. Quekett Micros. Club.

Late Editor Guy’s Hosp. Reps.; Author of “Sleeping and Dreaming,” an
Essay on Physiological Science; “The Physiology of Sleep,” etc.

“… It occurred to me that the artificial exposure of the brains of
living animals might afford opportunity for more definite observation
and further inquiry. With this idea I made numerous experiments and
observations.… It was suggested to me that the perforation of the skull
placed its contents in an unusual condition with regard to atmospheric
pressure, and that thus an unnatural state of the circulation might be
induced.… To obviate this and other possible objections, I replaced
the portions of bone removed by accurately fitting watch glasses, and
rendered the junction of their edges with the bone air-tight, by means
of inspissated Canada balsam.… I satisfied myself of the accuracy of
these observations by repeated experiments upon different animals. My
experiments upon dogs were the most satisfactory; those upon rabbits
least so.”--From “_Physiology of Sleep_” Guy’s Hospital Reports, Vol.
VI., 1860, p. 153, &c.

“The method employed by Donders and Ehrmann was the same as that
employed by Durham in the experiments he made upon animals to verify the
observations of Blumenbach, Caldwell, and others, on human patients.”…
“The results obtained by physiological experimentation, to prove that
sleep is accompanied by cerebral congestion, according to some, and
according to others by cerebral anemia, are not more valuable than the
results of clinical observation. Firstly, the animals upon which the
experiments have been made have been wounded more or less severely, and
thereby both excitement and pain have been caused; all have, therefore,
necessarily been placed under pathological conditions. It is impossible
to wound the head and open the skull without causing a severe shock to
the system of the animals, and a more or less violent irritation of the
brain; that is to say, not without producing a certain amount of pain.
And we know the influence that pain can have, not only on the functions
of the great organic apparatus (circulation, respiration, animal heat),
but also on the anatomical and physiological state of the nerve centres.
Another influence which, according to our idea, very considerably
diminishes the value of the results of physiological investigation, is
that sleep has always been produced by narcotics and anæsthetics in the
animals submitted to experimental observations.”… “We conclude from
this study that the real state of cerebral circulation, during natural
sleep, does not seem to have been arrived at, notwithstanding the great
number of observations and experiments lately made on this interesting
subject.”--DR. MARVAUD, _Gazette Médicale de Paris_, 1878 (p. 81-2).


=Eckhard, C.= M.D. Prof. Univ., Giessen.

Author of “Beiträge zur Anatomie und Physiologie,” Giessen; “Die Bildung
und Prüfung des Arztes;” “Experimental physiologie des Nervensystems;”
“Lehrbuch der Anatomie des Menschen.”

“It is known that there is no unity of opinion amongst the observers
of the phenomena which occur during artificial respiration in animals
poisoned by strychnine, and that furthermore those who agree about
the facts insist upon giving these different meanings.”--“_Ueber den
Strychnintetanus während der Künstlichen Respiration_,” “Beiträge,” p.
37.

“Expansion of the walls of the chest and abdomen by injection of gas into
the lungs. First I cut away so much of the larynx through the open mouth
of a frog that the animal can no longer close it at will. Then I sew the
under jaw firmly to the upper jaw. I stop up the one nostril by forcing
into it a short thick piece of wire. Then a similarly short and thick
canula which is in communication with the gasometer is fixed into the
other nostril. As soon as the frog shows symptoms of strychnine cramps,
its lungs are set in communication with the gasometer by opening the tap;
a side offshoot of the tube leads to the hdrg. manometer.”--“_Strychnine,
&c._” p. 48.


=Eichhorst, Hermann.= M.D.; Prof. Clin. Med., Univ. of Göttingen.

Author of “Handbuch der speciellen Pathologie und Therapie für practishe
Aertzte und Studirende;” “Die trophischen Beziehungen der Nervi vagi
zum Herzmuskel,” in Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wiss., 1879; “Lehrbuch der
Physikalischen Untersuchungs-Methoden innerer Krankheiten,” Brunswick,
1881; “Ueber Nervendegeneration und Nervenregeneration,” Archiv. für
path. Anat., Vol. LIX., 1874, p. 7.

Made experiments on birds.


=Ellenberger= (Prof.) Prosector Veterinary Sch., Berlin.

“Professor Ellenberger, of Dresden, cut through the facial nerves of five
old and emaciated horses. In the fifth it is stated ‘that it showed signs
of considerable pain during the operation.’ The others were apparently
so exhausted that even this operation made little impression on them.
Claude Bernard once made the same operation on a horse, and gave as
the result that the nostrils are no more capable of opening, and thus
the animals die of suffocation, since they breathe only through the
nostrils. This explanation has been hitherto accepted but is now disputed
by Ellenberger, who maintains that there is no danger for animals so
operated on if kept quiet, but only if they exert themselves, and he
recommends if paralysis of these nerves occurs, as is not unfrequently
the case, that one shall leave the cure to natural means.”--_Archiv. f.
Thierheilkunde_, vii., 4.


=Emery, C.= Prof. of Zoo., Univ. Bologna.

Joint editor, with A. Mosso, of “Archives italiennes de Biologie,” Paris,
1882, &c.

Studies on the kidneys of fishes.


=Engelhardt, Gustav= (Dr.) Prof. at Nuremberg.

Author of “Beiträge zur Lehre von den Bewegungen der Iris,” in
“Untersuchungen aus dem Physiologischen Laboratorium in Wurzburg,” 1869,
p. 308.

Experiments on the eyes of rabbits.


=Engelmann, Theodor W.= Prof. at Utrecht.

Author of “Physiologie des Ureters,” “Beiträge zur Physiologie des
Protoplasma,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol. II., “Beiträge zur allgemeinen
Muskel und Nerven Physiologie,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol. III.; “Zur
Anatomie und Physiologie der Flimmerzellen,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol.
XXIII., 1880; “Ueber Reizung Contractilen Protoplasmas durch plötzliche
Beleuchtung,” Onderzack, Physiol. Lab. Utrecht, 1880; “Ueber die
Bewegungen der Oscillarien und Diatomeen,” Ibid; “Ueber Degeneration
von Nervensfasern, Ein Beitrag zur cellular physiologie,” Pflüger, Vol.
XIII., p. 474.

Experiments with electricity on the exposed ureters of rabbits; also on
curarized frogs.


=Ercolani, Count Giovanbattista.= B. at Bologna, 1819. Prof. at the
Veterinary Institute of the University of Bologna. Perpetual Secretary
of the Academy of Sciences of the Institute. Member of many learned
Societies, and of the Institute of France. Exiled from Florence for
political causes he repaired to Turin, where he devoted himself to
scientific studies and experiments, Director of the Veterinary School of
San Salvario. Rector of the Univ. of Bologna from 1868 to 1871, &c., &c.
Mem. Inst. of Rome, and of Acad. of Berlin and St. Petersburg.

Author of “Sulla Transformazione degli Elementi Istologico Nell’
Organismo Animale,” Bologna, 1864; “Metamorfosi delle Piante,” Bologna,
1878, &c., &c.


=Erichsen, John Eric=, 6, Cavendish Place, W. F.R.C.S., Eng. (Exam.),
1845, and Mem. Council (Univ. College); F.R.S.; Mem. various Socs. home
and foreign; Surg. Extraordinary to H.M. the Queen; Emerit. Prof. of
Surg. and Clinical Surg., Univ. Coll.; Cons. Surg., Univ. Coll. Hosp.;
late Exam. in Surg., Univ. Lond., Roy. Coll. Phys., Lond. Roy. Coll.
Surg., and Univ. Durham; late Pres. R.C.S., Eng., and Roy. Med. and Chir.
Soc.

Author of “Science and Art of Surgery,” 8th Edit.; “Pathology and
Treatment of Asphyxia,” 2nd Edit. for which the Roy. Humane Soc. awarded
the Fothergill Gold Medal, value 50 guineas; “A Practical Treatise on
the Diseases of the Scalp;” “Observations on Aneurism, &c.” (Sydney
Society); “Railway Injuries of the Nervous System,” 1868; “Hospitalism
and the Causes of Death after Operations and Surgical Injuries,” 1874;
“Concussion of the Spine,” 2nd Edit., 1882. Contrib. various papers on
surgical subjects to Lancet, Med. and Chir. Trans., Med. Gaz., and Edin.
Med. Surg. Journal.

“‘Experiment 9. Three mongrel terriers, A, B, C, were properly secured.…
One of the jugular veins of the centre dog was then exposed, and a
ligature was passed under it, so that it might be punctured so as to
avoid the occurrence of plethora and apoplexy when the carotid arteries
of the two lateral dogs were connected with the corresponding vessels of
the central one.… The central dog began to struggle.… The lateral dogs
were both alive, but evidently enfeebled by loss of blood.’”--_Edinburgh
Medical and Surgical Journal_, Vol. LXIII., Art. 1, “An experimental
Inquiry into the Pathology and Treatment of Asphyxia,” by John E.
Erichsen.


=Esbach=, Dr., 6, Place de Valois, Paris. Lab. Hosp. de Necker.


=Ewart, J. Cossar=, Univ., Edin. M.D. Edin. (Gold Medal), 1878; M.B.
and C.M. (Honours), 1874; F.R.C.S. Edin., 1878; Regius Prof. of Nat.
Hist. Univ. Edin.; Director Scott. Zool. Station; formerly Demonstrator
of Anat. Univ. Edin.: Conserv. Mus. Univ. Coll. London, and Lecturer on
Anat., Edin. Sch. of Med.

Author of “Manual of Pract. Anat.,” Part 1, 1879. Contrib. Journ. Anat.
and Physiol. Proc. Roy. Soc., etc., etc.

_Held License for Vivisection at Aberdeen University; Physiological
Laboratory, and Materia Medica Department, Marischal College, in 1881 and
1882. Certificates for Experiments without Anæsthetics 1881 and 1882. No
Experiments returned in 1882._


=Exner, Sigismund.= Asst. Prof. at the Physiol. Inst. Vienna.

Author of “Zur Lehre von den Gehörsempfindungen,” Pflüger’s _Archiv_,
Vol. XIII., p. 228.


=Falchi= (Dr.) Chef de Clinique Ophthalmogique, Turin.

Very numerous experiments, injecting tubercular matter into the eyes of
animals.


=Fano, J.=, M.D., Free Prof. and Asst. in Physiol. Univ. Florence.

Author of “Recherches expérimentales sur un nouveau centre automatique
dans le tractus bulbo spinal,” “Arch. Ital. de Biol.,” 1883, Vol. III.,
p. 365.

Experiments on turtles, toads, and fishes.

“On turtles alone I have made more than fifty experiments. The
experiments on fishes I have only just commenced, and they do not allow
me to draw from them any valid conclusions on the subject. My attempts
to extend my researches to the superior vertebrates--that is to say, to
mammals and birds--are limited to two experiments on unweaned puppies and
one experiment on a pigeon.”--_Arch. Ital. de Biol._, Vol. III., 1833, p.
367.


=Fayrer, Sir Joseph=, K.C.S.I., 53, Wimpole Street, Cavendish Square, W.
M.D. Edin., 1859; F.R.C.P. Lond., 1872; F.R.C.S. Edin., 1858; F.R.C.S.
Eng., 1878; M. 1847; LL.D. Edin., 1878; F.R.S. Lond. and Edin.; F.R.G.S.
Lond.; Vice-Pres. Zool. Soc., Lond.; Pres. Epidem. Soc. Lond.; Fell. Med.
Soc. Lond.; Fell. Roy. Med Chir. and Obst. Socs., etc.; Mem. (late Pres.)
Asiat. Soc. Bengal; Fell. Acad. Sci. Philadelph.; Hon. Phys. to H.M. the
Queen and to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales; Phys. to H.R.H. the Duke of
Edinburgh; Phys. to Sec. of State for India in Council; Pres. Med. Board,
India Office; Mem. Army Sanit. Commiss.; Mem. Senate Army Med. Sch.,
Netley; late Prof. Med. Coll. and Sen. Surg. Med. Coll. Hosp. Calcutta;
late Pres. Med. Fac. Univ. Calcutta; Member of the Association for the
Advancement of Medicine by Research.

Author of “Clinical Surgery in India,” 1866; “Clinical and Pathological
Observations in India,” 1873; “On the Physiological Action of the Poison
of Najatripudians, and other Venomous Snakes (conjointly with Dr. L.
Brunton),” etc. etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital Medical
School, also unrestricted as to place, in 1878. Certificates for
Experiments without Anæsthetics and for Experiments on Cats, Dogs,
Horses, Mules, or Asses in 1878. No Experiments on Horses, Mules or
Asses._

“The experiments, of which this is a summary, were commenced in October,
1867, and have been continued as regularly since, at such intervals as
time and other and more important avocations permitted.… The living
creatures experimented on have been the ox, horse, goat, pig, dog, cat,
civet, mongoose, rabbit, rat, fowls, kites, herons, fish, innocent
snakes, poisonous snakes, lizards, frogs, toads, snails.”--“_Summary of
Experiments on Snake Poison_,” by J. Fayrer, M.D., C.S.I., Med. Times,
April 1st, 1871, p. 374.

“After careful consideration, fully admitting that in permanganate of
potash we have an agent which can chemically neutralize snake-poison,
I do not see that more has been done than to draw attention to a local
remedy already well known as a chemical antidote, the value of which
depends on its efficient application to the contaminated part (which Dr.
Wall has pointed out is too uncertain to be reliable). We are still,
then, as far off an antidote as ever, and the remarks made by me in 1868
are as applicable now as they were then. They were as follows:--‘To
conceive of an antidote, as that term is usually understood, we must
imagine a substance so subtle as to follow, overtake, and neutralise
the venom in the blood, and that shall have the power of counteracting
or neutralising the poisonous or deadly influence it has exerted on
the vital force. Such a substance has still to be found, nor does our
experience of drugs give hopeful anticipations that we shall find
it.’”--_Sir J. Fayrer_, “_Address to Medical Society of London_,”
_British Medical Journal_, Feb. 2, 1884.


=Fede, Francesco.= Prof. Naples University.


=Fehleisen, F.= M.D.; Private Lecturer Clinical Institute Berlin, 1877.

Author of “Die Aetiologie des Erysipels,” Berlin, 1883.

“The beautiful experiments of Fehleisen, on erysipelas, have definitely
established the fact that this disease is due to the growth of micrococci
in the lymphatic vessels of the skin. He succeeded in cultivating these
organisms in gelatinised meat-infusion, and inducing the disease by the
cultivated micrococcus in rabbits, and also in man.”--_British Medical
Journal_, Dec. 29th, 1883, p. 1208.


=Feltz= (Prof.) Nancy Med. Faculty; Prof. Path. Anat. and Physiol. Med.
Fac., Nancy.


=Ferrari, Italo.= Assist. Prof. at the Physiol. Lab. Univ., Parma.


=Ferrier, David=, 16, Upper Berkeley Street, Portman Square, W. M.D.
Edin., 1870; M.B. and C.M. (Highest Honours), 1868; F.R.C.P. Lond., 1877;
M. 1872; M.A. Aberd. (Double First), 1863; LL.D. (Edin. and Heidelberg);
F.R.S.; Corr. Mem. Soc. Clin., Paris; Accad. Reale de Med., Turin;
Lauréat de l’Institut de France, 1878; Prof. Forensic Med. King’s Coll.;
Asst. Phys. King’s Coll. Hosp.; Marshall Hall Prizem., 1883; Prof. of
For. Med. King’s Coll.; Phys. Nat. Hosp. for Paralysed and Epileptic,
etc.; Lecturer on Physiol. Middlx. Hosp. Med. Sch. and Exam. For. Med.
Univ. Edin. and Univ. Lond.

Author of Gold Medal Thesis on “The Comparative Anatomy of the Corpora
Quadrigemina,” 1870; “Experimental Researches in Cerebral Physiology and
Pathology,” W. Rid. Med. Reps. 1873; “The Localisation of Function in
the Brain;” “Experiments on the Brain of Monkeys,” (Croonian Lecture),
Phil. Trans., Part II., 1875, etc., etc. Joint Author of “Guy’s Forensic
Medicine;” “The Functions of the Brain;” Gulst. Lects. on Localisation of
Cerebral Disease; Joint Editor of “Brain,” and author of various Papers
therein.

_Held a License for Vivisection at King’s College Physiological
Laboratory, in 1882-83, with Certificate dispensing with obligation to
kill in same years._

Made experiments at Wakefield in regard to the examination of various
parts of the skull.--_Ev. Roy. Com._, p. 169.

(Q. 3326.) “I should allow everybody liberty to perform experiments
in his own private laboratory. A great many experimenters live in the
country, and have no access to a public laboratory, and that would
entirely prevent them from carrying on research.--(3327.) Do you think
that there are many such persons? Yes.--(3328.) And who are practising in
their own laboratories, and unconnected with medical schools do you mean?
I used to do so when I lived in the country, in Suffolk, at Bury St.
Edmunds. I performed experiments there for my own purposes of research.”

…

(3331.) “Then you experiment at your own house as well as at King’s
College, do you? Yes; it would interfere with my professional work
if I were obliged to go such a distance from home to perform my
experiments.”--_Ibid._, p. 173.

(3245.) “Now with regard to original research, how would you express
yourself on that subject? I should say, that, wherever it is possible to
avoid the infliction of pain on animals subjected to experiments, the
means should be adopted either by chloroform or ether, or opium or other
anæsthetic; but that where the administration of an anæsthetic would
prejudice the object for which the experiment was conceived, that the
experiment is still justifiable, notwithstanding the fact that it might
inflict a certain amount of pain on the animal.”--_Ibid._, p. 170.

“The interest attaching to the discussion was greatly enhanced by the
fact that Professor Ferrier was willing to exhibit two monkeys which he
had operated upon some months previously.… In striking contrast to the
dog were two monkeys exhibited by Professor Ferrier. One of them had been
operated upon in the middle of January, the left motor area having been
destroyed. There had resulted from the operation right-sided hemiplegia”
(paralysis of the right half of the body) “with conjugate deviation of
the eyes and head” (eyes and head permanently twisted). “Facial paralysis
was at first well marked, but ceased after a fortnight. From the first
there had been paralysis of the right leg, though the animal was able to
lift it up. The arm it never had been able to use. Lately, rigidity of
the muscles of the paralyzed limb had been coming on. The other monkey,
as a consequence of paralysis of all auditory centres, was apparently
entirely unaffected by loud noises, as by the firing of percussion caps
in close proximity to the head.”--_Lancet’s_ Report of the Proceedings at
the International Medical Congress, Oct. 8, 1881.

“Exper. IV., June 18th, 1873.--The right hemisphere of a monkey had been
partially exposed and experimented on for the purpose of localising the
region of electric stimulation. The part exposed included the ascending
parietal and postero-parietal convolutions, the ascending frontal, and
the posterior extremities of the three frontal convolutions. After
having been under experimentation for eight hours, the animal recovered
sufficiently to sit up and take food. The wound was sewn up, and the
animal placed in its cage.

“June 19th.--The animal is apparently as well as ever, eating and
drinking heartily, and as lively and intelligent as before. No change was
perceptible during the whole of this day.

“June 20th.--The wound was oozing, and the animal was less active; but
there was no diminution of sensation or voluntary motion. It closely
watched flies buzzing about, and frequently made attempts to catch
them. Towards the afternoon it began to suffer from choreic spasms of
the left angle of the mouth and of the left hand. There was no loss
of consciousness. The animal was apparently annoyed by the spasmodic
actions of its mouth, and frequently endeavoured to still them by holding
its mouth with the other hand. Towards the close of the day the spasms
frequently repeated, became more intense, and exhibited an epileptic
nature, the convulsions on the left side of the body becoming general.
This state continued till.…

“June 23rd.--…

“June 24th.--Hemiplegia is complete on the left side, hand, foot, and
face. The animal moved by means of its left limbs, dragging the right
after it.

“The animal died from exhaustion on the 27th.”--_Croonian Lecture_,
“_Experiments on the Brain of Monkeys_,” Philos. Trans., 1875, pp. 441-42.

“Exper. XVI., Feb. 5th, 1875.--This, though not successful as regards
the object intended, yet presents some interesting phenomena. The left
occipital lobe was exposed posteriorly, and penetrated at the posterior
extremity of the superior occipital fissure by means of hot wires,
which were directed with a view to follow the inner aspect of the
temporo-sphenoidal lobe. There was no hæmorrhage from the sinus. During
the operation, the animal was observed to make sighing respiration. The
operation was finished at 4.30 p.m. The animal lay in a state of stupor
for more than an hour, only making slight movements when disturbed, and
then with its left limbs.

“7 p.m.--The animal lies quiet, but indicates consciousness by grunting
discontentedly when moved. Struggles with its limbs, chiefly the left,
but occasionally with the right. On testing the cutaneous sensibility
with the hot iron, reaction was decisive over the whole of the left
side, but quite abolished in the right. The animal occasionally opened
its right eye, but the left remained permanently closed. The animal
passed into a state of coma, and was found dead at 11.30 p.m. The
following experiment is a repetition of the last, and was only partially
successful.”--_Ibid._, p. 464.

“These ganglia (corpora quadrigemina) were subjected to experimentation
in the following seven cases, viz., V., VI., VIII., IX., X., XII., XIII.,
with the results:--

“V. In this case the exploration was not sufficiently definite, as the
exact position of the electrodes was not observed, and death occurred
before a more careful exploration could be made. The application of
the electrodes to the ganglia on the left side, caused the animal to
utter various barking, howling, or screaming sounds of an incongruous
character. The head was drawn back and to the right, and the right
angle of the mouth was strongly retracted while the stimulation
was kept up. The tail was raised and the limbs were thrown into
contortions, but nothing further was ascertained as the animal died from
hæmorrhage.”--_Ibid._, p. 429.

“Experiments on the lower animals, even on apes, often lead to
conclusions seriously at variance with well-established facts of clinical
and pathological observation.… The decisive settlement of such points
must depend mainly on careful clinical and pathological research.…
Experiments have led to different views in different hands.”--Ferrier
(_Functions of the Brain_, Preface).

“Physiological experiments conducted in these regions are most
indefinite. The usual plan of investigation, viz., that of applying
stimuli to the brain substance, leads either to negative results, or,
if electrical stimulation is used, to results which, owing to the
unavoidable dispersal of the currents in numerous directions, are not
sufficiently localised to form the basis for trustworthy conclusions. In
place of exact observations after section and stimulation of different
regions, we have here the far less refined method of observation after
lesions--lesions induced in the most delicate and complicated organ
of the body by means so absurdly rough that, as Ludwig has forcibly
put it, they may be compared to injuries to a watch by means of a
pistol-shot. The results obtained in this way are attributable to the
most diverse causes; for, apart from the fact that it is impossible to
localise the lesion itself, the results may be due to irritation of
centres, paralysis of centres, stimulation of conducting apparatus, or
paralysis of conducting apparatus, without our being able to say which.
Hence the interpretation of even those phenomena which are constant
in their occurrence is always uncertain. The third and best method of
investigation which is possible is the observation of cases of disease
in which the exact nature of the lesions is accurately ascertained after
death.”--_Hermann’s Human Physiology_, translated by Professor Gamgee,
London, 1878. (Chapter on the Functions of the Encephalon), p. 444.


=Fick, Adolf.= B. at Cassel, 1829. M.D., 1852, Extraordinary Prof., 1856,
and later, Prof. of Physiology in ordinary Univ. Zurich; Prof. Physiol.
at Wurzburg, 1868.

Author of “Die medicinische Physik,” Brunswick, 1857; “Compendium der
Physiologie des Menschen mit Einschluss der Entwickelungageschichte,”
Vienna, 1860; “Anatomie und Physiologie der Sinne,” Lahr, 1862; and
numerous papers on physiology which have appeared under the title
of “Arbeiten aus dem Physiologischen Laboratorium der Würzburger
Hochschule,” Wurzburg, 1874.

Made experiments on the influence of mechanical stimulation of the
cerebro-spinal organs described in “Arch. of Anat. Physiol., 1867,” p.
198.


=Filehne, Wilhelm=, M.D. Prof. Extraordinary Univ. of Erlangen.

Author of “Die Wirkungen des Amylnitrites,” Mueller’s Archives, 1879,
Physiol. Abtheil; “Ueber Apnoë und die Wirkung eines energischen
Kohlensäurestromes auf die Schleimhäute des Respirationsapparats und
ueber den Einfluss beider auf verschiedene Krampfformen,” Reichert u. du
Bois Reymond, Archiv für Anat. u. s. w. Jahrg. 1873, p. 361.

Made experiments in the Physiological Institute at Erlangen.


=Fiori, Andrea=, M.D. Assistant Prof. University, Modena.


=Fleming, William James=, 155, Bath Street, Glasgow. M.D. Glasgow, 1879;
M.B. 1872; F.F.P.S. Glasg., 1875; L. 1872; (Univs. Glasg. and Edin.);
Lect. on Physiol. Glasg. Roy. Infirm. School of Med.; Ext. Disp. Surg.
Roy. Infirm.; Exam. in Physiol. F.P.S. Glasg.

Contrib. “Behaviour of Carbolised Catgut inserted among Living Tissues,”
Lancet, 1876; “The Motions of the Brain” (with illust. graphic tracings),
Glasg. Med. Journ., 1877; “Physiology of the Turkish Bath,” Journ. Anat.
and Physiol., Vol. XIII.; “Pulse Dicrotism,” Ibid., Vol. XV.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Glasgow Royal Infirmary Medical
School in 1879-80-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures
in 1879-80-81-82-83. Certificates Dispensing with obligation to Kill
in 1880, Certificate for Experiments without Anæsthetics in 1882. No
Experiments returned in 1883._


=Flint, Austin.= B. Northampton, Mass., U.S., 1836; M.D., Jeff. Med.
Coll., 1857; Prof. Phys. Univ.; Buffalo, 1858; Professor of Physiology
and Microscopy, Bellevue Hosp.; Medical College, New York, and Long
Island College Hospital; Fell. New York Acad. of Med.; Resident Mem. of
Lyceum of Nat. Hist., New York, &c.

Author of “Physiology of Man,” 4 Vols., New York, 1866, etc.; Essay on
“The Excretory Function of the Liver,” which received the French Inst.
prize of 1,500 fr.; contrib. to “American Journ. of Med. Science,” etc.

“… For some years the author has been in the habit of employing
vivisections in public teachings.”--Preface to “_Physiology of Man_,”
Vol. I., p. 8.

“We have long been in the habit, in class demonstrations, of removing the
optic lobe on one side from a pigeon.… The experiment of dividing the
sympathetic in the neck, especially in rabbits, is so easily performed
that the phenomena observed by Bernard and Brown-Séquard have been
repeatedly verified. We have often done this in class demonstrations.”
“The cerebral lobes were removed from a young pigeon in the usual way,
an operation … which we practice yearly as a class demonstration.” “Our
own experiments, which have been very numerous during the last fifteen
years, are simply repetitions of those of Flourens, and the results have
been the same without exception.” We have frequently removed both kidneys
from dogs and when the operation is carefully performed the animals live
from three to five days.“--Dr. Flint’s _Report to the Medical Congress_,
August, 1881.

“It is not desirable to administer an anæsthetic, and it is much
more satisfactory to divide the nerve without etherising the animal,
as the evidence of pain is an important guide in this delicate
operation.”--_Text-Book_, p. 641.

Speaking of an experiment by which an animal was caused to vomit from a
pig’s bladder which had been substituted for a stomach, Dr. Flint says in
his “_Physiology of Man_,” Vol II., p. 300:--“These experiments were made
simply for class demonstrations, and have never before been published.”


=Flourens, Jean Pierre Marie.= B. at Thezan (Hérault), 1794, D. at
Mougeron, near Paris, 1867; M.D., Montpellier, 1813, pupil of De Candolle
and Cuvier; Prof. at the Jardin des Plantes; Mem. of Inst. of France;
Perpetual Sec. Acad. des Sciences; Mem. Academy of France; Commander Leg.
of Hon.; Mem. of principal Litt. and Scient. Socs. of Europe.

Author of “Analyse de la Philosophie Anatomique, où l’on considère plus
particulièrement l’influence qu’aura cet ouvrage sur l’état actuel de
la Physiologie,” Paris, 1819; “Recherches sur les fonctions du grand
sympathique,” 1823; “Recherches expérir mentales sur les propriétés et
les fonctions du système nerveux dans les animaux vertébrés,” Paris,
1824; “Expériences sur le système nerveux,” Paris, 1825; “Expériences
sur l’action de la moëlle épinière sur la circulation,” Paris, 1829; “De
l’instinct et de l’intelligence des animaux,” Paris, 1841; “Recherches
sur le développement des os et des dents,” Paris, 1842; “Mécanisme
de la respiration des poissons,” Paris, 1843; “Anatomie Générale
de la peau et des membranes Muqueuses,” Paris, 1843; “Examen de la
Phrénologie, réfutation des doctrines matérialistes de Gall, Spurzheim,
et Brouissais,” Paris, 1842; “Théorie expérimentale de la formation
des os,” Paris, 1847; “Nouvelles recherches touchant l’histoire de la
circulation du sang,” Journal des Savants, 1849; “De la longévité humaine
et de la quantité de vie sur la terre,” Paris, 1856; “De la vie et de
l’intelligence,” Paris, 1858; “De la raison du génie et de la folie,”
Paris, 1861; “Psychologie comparée,” Paris, 1864, and a great number of
contributions to the “Comptes rendus de l’acad. des Sciences.”

Made numerous experiments on ruminating animals, on rabbits, on the
brains of fishes, and on the semi-circular canals of the brains of ducks,
fowls, and pigeons.

“The description given by Flourens of the phenomena resulting from the
section of the semi-circular canals in rabbits, is almost entirely
inaccurate.”--Cyon, “_Fonctions des canaux semi-circulaires_,” Bibl. de
l’École des Hautes Études, Paris, 1879, p. 51, note 2.

“Flourens supported his bold hypothesis almost solely by experiments on
pigeons and other inferior animals. The few experiments on mammals, which
he mentions, are very meagrely described and of trifling value.”--Goltz,
“_Verrichtungen des Grosshirns_, p. 3.

“I heard M. Flourens, in one of his lectures, state the
following:--‘Majendie sacrificed 4,000 dogs to establish the distinctions
of the sensory and the motor nerves according to Charles Bell; then he
sacrificed 4,000 more dogs to prove that he had made a mistake. I,’ added
M. Flourens, ‘had to continue the experiments, and I have proved that
Majendie’s first opinion was correct; the reflex motions, which he did
not quite understand, had caused his doubts. To arrive at this result,
I also have had to sacrifice a great number of dogs.’”--Blatin, _Nos
Cruautés_, pp. 201-202.


=Foderholm, A.= M.D., Stockholm.

Made experiments on dogs and rabbits with carbon oxide.--_Scandinavian
Med. Archives_, 1874.


=Fortunatow, A.= Physiol. Inst., St. Petersburg.

Author of “Ueber die Fettresorption und histologische Structur der
Dünndarmzotten,” Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. XIV., p. 285.

Experiments on the bile of frogs and lampreys.


=Foster, Michael=, Shelford, Cambridge. M.D. Lond., 1859; M.B., 1858;
B.A., 1854; M.R.C.S. Eng. 1857 (Univ. Coll.); LL.D. (Hon.), Glasg.; M.A.
(Hon.), Cantab.; F.R.S., F.C.S., F.L.S.; Fell. Univ. Coll., Lond.; Prof,
of Physiol. Univ. Camb.; Fell, and late Praelect. of Physiol. Trin.
Coll., Camb.; late Fuller Prof. Physiol. Roy. Inst., Great Britain; and
Prof. of Pract. Physiol. Univ. Coll., Lond. Member of the Assoc. for
Advancement of Medicine by Research.

Author of “Text Book of Physiology;” “Primer of Physiology;” joint author
of “Elements of Embryology;” “Handbook of Physiological Laboratory.”
Editor “Journ. of Physiol.” Contrib. Journ. Anat. and Physiol., Proc.
Roy. Soc., etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Cambridge University Physiological
Laboratory New Museum, also unrestricted as to place in 1878-79-80-81-82.
Certificate for Illustrations of Lectures, also Two Certificates
dispensing with obligation to kill in 1878. No experiments returned._


=Fothergill, John Milner=, 110, Park Street, Grosvenor Square, W. M.D.
Edin., 1865; M.R.C.P. Lond., 1872; L.R.C.P. Edin., 1865; L.R.C.S. Edin.,
1865; (Univ. Edin., Vienna, and Berlin); Mem. Gen. Com. Univ. Edin.;
Assoc. Fell. Coll. Phys. Philadelphia; Phy. City of Lond. Hosp. for Dis.
of Chest; late Asst. Phys. W. Lond. Hosp.; formerly Sen. Res. Med. Off.
Leeds Dispensary.

Author of “Digitalis: its Mode of Action and its Use” (Hastings Prize
Essay British Med. Assoc.), 1870; “The Heart and its Diseases, with
their Treatment, including the Gouty Heart,” 2nd edit., 1879; “The
Practitioner’s Handbook of Treatment; or the Principles of Therapeutics,”
2nd edit., 1880; “The Antagonism of Therapeutic Agents, and what it
Teaches” (Fothergill Prize Essay, Med. Soc.), London, 1878; “Animal
Physiology,” 1881, etc., and numerous contribs. to _Lancet_, _Brit. Med.
Journal_, _Brain_, _Practitioner_, etc.

“Our object was to verify the assertions of several authors, but more
especially those of Fothergill, who asserts that digitalis occasions a
contraction of the small arteries; which he has noticed occurs in the
web of a frog’s foot. The experiments which I have made in connexion
with this fact have given negative results. With a view to observe this
action, I have often examined the webs of frogs’ feet for hours under
the microscope without succeeding in observing any change in the small
arteries.”--_Pflüger’s Archiv._, Vol. V., p. 168.


=Foulis, D.=, Glasgow. Lect. Path. Roy. Inf. Med. School; M.D.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Glasgow Royal Infirmary Medical
School in 1881. Certificate dispensing with obligation to kill, 1881. No
experiments returned._


=Fox, Wilson=, 67, Grosvenor Street, W. M.D. Lond., 1855; B.A., 1850;
F.R.C.P. Lond., 1866; (Univ. Coll.); F.R.S.; Phys. Extraordinary to H.
M. the Queen; Phys. in Ord. to their R. I. H. the Duke and Duchess of
Edinburgh; Fell. of Univ. Coll.; Holme Prof. Clin. Med. Univ. Coll.; and
Phys. Univ. Coll. Hosp.; Corr. Mem. Phys. Med. Gesellschaft, Warzburg.

Author of “Diseases of the Stomach;” “On the Artificial Production of
Tubercle” (Lect. R.C.P.), and various contrib. to Med. Chir. Trans.,
Phil. Trans., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, London, New
Physiological Theatre and Physiological Laboratory and Curator’s
Rooms, in 1882 and 1883; also same years a Certificate dispensing with
obligation to kill. No Experiments returned._

“It is not without historical interest that Dr. Wilson Fox has formally
confessed his belief in the fallacies of his former experiments, and
basing this opinion upon the results of a careful series of similar
investigations carried out, at his request, by Dr. Dawson Williams, in
Dr. Burdon-Sanderson’s laboratory, he has expressed his belief in the
specific nature of the tubercular virus. Dr. Fox has found, on repetition
of his former experiments, that any injury to rodents does not cause
tubercle, but that it is only produced by the inoculation of tubercular
material.”--_Brit. Med. Journ._, Dec. 29th, 1883, p. 1298.

“Wilson Fox operated on a considerable number of animals (117 guinea-pigs
and 12 rabbits), and he experimented with every variety of matter whether
tuberculous or not.”--_Arch. de Méd._, 1883, Vol. XI., p. 48.


=Fraenkel, Albert.= M.D.; Assistant at the Medical School and Private
Lecturer at the University, Berlin.

Contrib. to “Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift,” 1883, No. 37, and to
Allgem. Med. Central-Zeitung, 1883, Nos. 11 and 62.

Verified the experiments published by Paul Bert in his “Pression
barométrique.”


=Franck, François=, 5, Rue Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, Paris. Prof. Nat.
Hist. of Organic Bodies and Physiol., Coll. France.

Author of “Effet des excitations des nerfs sensibles sur le cœur et
la circulation artérielle, dans Travaux du Lab. de M. Marcy,” 1876;
“Recherches, expérimentales sur les effets cardiaques, vasculaires et
respiratoires des excitations douloureuses,” “Comptes rendus” l’Acad.
des Sci., 1876-1878. Contrib. Art. “De la Dissociation des filets irido
dilatateurs et des nerfs vasculaires au dessus du ganglion cervical
supérieur;” to Gaz. Méd. de Paris, 1878, p. 378, “experiments on dogs.”
Contrib. “Physiologie expérimentale: innervation du cœur,” Gaz. Hebdom.
No. 15, (1879), p. 230; No. 16, p. 246; No. 18, p. 277; No. 19, p. 295;
No. 21, p. 326; “Système Nerveux physiologie générale,” Dict. encyclop.
des Sciences Médicales, Paris, 1879; also various articles to Gazette
Médicale de Paris; Comptes rendus de la Soc. de Biol., and Journal de
l’Anat. et de Physiologie.

Inventor of an apparatus for submitting animals to rapid or slow
variations of temperature.--_Gaz. Méd. de Paris_, June 7th, 1879.


=Fraser, J. L.=, Edinburgh. M.D.; Lab. Vet. College, Clyde, Street;
Physiol. Class Room.


=Fraser, Thomas Richard=, 37, Melville Street, and University, Edinburgh.
M.D. Edin. (Thesis Gold Medallist), 1862; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1869; M. 1868;
(Edin.) F.R.S. Lond. & Edin.; Corr. Mem. Therap. Soc. Paris, etc. Prof.
of Mat. Med. and Clin. Med. Univ. Edin.

Contrib. “On the Physiological Action of the Calabar Bean:” Trans. Roy.
Soc. Edin. Vol. XXIV.; “An Investigation into some previously undescribed
Tetanic Systems produced by Atropia in cold blooded Animals,” etc., and
various other papers to Journ. Anat. and Physiol., Practitioner, etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University of Edinburgh, Materia
Medica Department, in 1878-79-81-82. Certificates for Experiments without
Anæsthetics, in 1878-79-81-82. Two Certificates for the same purpose in
1878. No experiments returned in 1878-81-82._

[In Return for 1881 entered as J. L. Fraser.]


=Fredericq, Léon.= M.D., Prof. in Ord. Univ. of Liège, Belgium.

Author of “Expériences sur l’innervation respiratoire;” Supp. Du Bois
Raymond’s Arch., 1883, p. 51; Contrib. to Du Bois Reymond’s Archives,
1883.

Experiments on the innervation of respiratory centres; also on the
effects of ice on the exposed spinal cord of rabbits. Has used dogs,
rabbits, and ducks for his experiments.


=Frerichs, Friedrich Theodor.= Born 1819, at Aurich. In 1838 studied
at Göttingen; 1842, practised medicine at Aurich, where he acquired
some renown as an oculist. Studied also at the Institutions of Prague,
Vienna, Holland, Belgium, and France. Private Prof. of Med. in Göttingen.
Director of the Academical Hospital, Kiel. Conducted two ambulance
hospitals during the Schleswig-Holstein War. Prof. of Pathology and
Therapeutics, Breslau, 1851. Professor of clinical medicine and director
of La Charité, Berlin, 1859; councillor and member of the Scientific
Deputation for medical affairs.

Author of “Ueber Gallert oder Colloidgeschwülste,” Göttingen, 1847;
“Ueber die Brightsche Nierenkrankheit,” Brunswick, 1857; “Klinik der
Leberkrankheiten,” Brunswick, 1859-62 (translated into French, English,
and Italian). Contrib. numerous articles to Liebig’s, Poggendorf’s, and
Wöhler’s Dictionaries of Chemistry, etc.


=Fritsch, Gustav Theodor.= M.D. B. at Kottbus, 1838. Studied in Berlin,
Breslau, and Heidelberg. Anat. Inst. Berlin, 1867. Extraordinary Prof.
same Univ., 1874.

Author of “Drei Jahre in Süd Afrika,” Breslau, 1868; “Ueber das
stereoskopische Sehen im Mikroskop,” Berlin, 1873; “Untersuchungen ueber
den feineren Bau des Fischgehirns mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der
Homologien bei anderen Wirbelthierklassen,” Berlin, 1878. Joint author
with E. Hitzig of “Ueber elektrische Erregbarkeit des Grosshirns,” in
Arch. f. Anat. u. Physiol. Wissensch. III., 1870, p. 300-332.

“By means of perfected electric apparatus G. Fritsch and E. Hitzig were
enabled to satisfy themselves that the surface of the brain in the rabbit
reacted under the influence of the electric current. They then made
a series of experiments on dogs, and published results which did not
perhaps attract sufficient attention, and which were in opposition to the
opinions till then accepted.”--_Art. “Cerveau,” Encyclopédie des Sciences
Médicales_, Vol. XIV., 1873, p. 210.


=Fubini, Simon.= B. 1841. M.D. Turin; Prof. of Physiol. Univ. of Turin;
Prof. Univ. Palermo.

Author of “Sulla Condrina, Osservazioni di Moleschott e Fubini,
Annotazione sopra la saliva parotidea e sopra il sudore;” “Gemelli
xiphoide juncti,” Giornale della R. Accademia di medicina, No. 1 e 2,
1878, &c. Editor of Turin Medical Gazette.


=Funke, Otto.= B. at Chemnitz, 1828. Studied Univ. Leipsig, 1846; Prof.
Physiol. Leipsig, 1854; Prof. Univ. Freiburg in Breslau, 1860; Mem.
Academy of Saxony.

Author of “Atlas der physiologischen Chemie,” Leipsig, 1858; last part
of “Günther’s Lehrbuch der Physiologie für Akademische Vorlesungen,”
Leipsig, 1870; “Lehrbuch der Physiologie,” Leipsig, 1880.


=Gamgee, Arthur=, Owen’s Coll., Manchester, and Oaklands, Bowdon,
Cheshire. M.D. Edin. (Thesis Gold Medallist), 1862; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1872;
M. 1871 (Edin.); F.R.S. London; Brackenbury Professor of Physiol. and
Histol. and Dean of Med. Department Owen’s College, Manchester; Exam. in
Physiol. Univ. London; late Lecturer on Physiol. Surg. Hall; Physician
Roy. Hosp. for Sick Children, and Sen. Pres. Roy. Med. Soc. Edin.; Mem.
Assoc. for Advancement of Medicine by Research.

Author of “A Text Book of the Physiological Chemistry of the Animal
Body,” 1880; Translator and Editor “Hermann’s Elementary Human
Physiology;” Joint Editor Journ. of Physiol., Cambridge; also of numerous
Papers in various Journs. and Trans. of Learned Socs.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Owen’s College, Manchester, in
1878-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures in 1881-82-83.
Certificates for Experiments without Anæsthetics and for Experiments on
Cats, Dogs, Horses, Mules or Asses in 1878. No Experiments returned in
1881. No Experiments on Horses, Mules or Asses._

“(Q. 5412.) (Viscount Cardwell.) You are of opinion that in inflicting
operations, in themselves very painful, upon living animals, curare ought
not to be trusted as taking away sensibility to pain? I should think
not. I would add this: I do not believe that physiologists use it for
that purpose. It is used in order to eliminate a series of fallacies
which obtrude themselves in physiological experiments.”--_Ev. Roy. Com._,
London, 1876.

“Nor was I guilty of the want of taste and judgment with which she
(Miss Cobbe) taunts me and English physiologists in general, of
exonerating themselves at the expense of their continental confrères.
‘Unquestionably’ I said ‘there have been brutal things done by
physiologists, _never_ as far as I am aware by English and _very rarely_
by continental physiologists.’”--_Manchester Guardian_, Feb. 13, 1883.


=Gaskell, W. H.=, Cambridge. M.A., M.D.

Author of “On the Vasomotor Nerves of Striated Muscles,” Studies of the
Physiol. Lab. Univ. Cambridge, p. 132.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Cambridge Physiological
Laboratory New Museum in 1879-80-81-82-83. No Experiments returned in
1880-81 and 1882._

“15th February, 1878.--Terrier bitch, quite young, weighs 7½ kilogrammes
(about 16½ lbs.). Extensor vein prepared on both sides; ligature
placed under left crural nerve. Morphia and curare given. Artificial
respiration.” &c.

“31st January, 1878.--Dog, weight 8 kilogrammes (about 17⅔ lbs.). Morphia
and curare. Artificial respiration. Right extensor vein and right crural
nerve prepared.” &c.

“20th February, 1878.--Terrier bitch, weight 6¼ kilo (about 13¾ lbs.).
Morphia given. Left extensor vein prepared, and left crural nerve cut
and ligatured at 4.2 p.m. Between 3.40 and 4.7 p.m., 0·015 grms. curare
were injected into jugular vein; artificial respiration.” &c.

“February 18, 1878.--Large sheep dog, weight 20·5 kilo, (about 45¼ lbs.).
Morphia given, 0·075 grms. curare, injected into jugular vein. Abdomen
opened in middle line, and left abdominal sympathetic trunk cut and
ligatured about the fourth lumbar ganglion.” &c.

“March 4, 1878.--Spaniel bitch, weight 13¾ kilo, (about 30¼ lbs.). After
the termination of the curve given in Fig. 3, 0·06 grms. curare were
injected into the jugular vein; artificial respiration was performed,
and the left crural nerve was laid free.” &c.--“Further Researches on
the Vasomotor Nerves of Ordinary Muscles,” by W. H. Gaskell, M.A., Trin.
Coll. Camb., “_Journ. Physiol._” Vol. I., pp. 265-6, 276, 228, 295.


=Gautier, E. J. Armand=, 72, Rue d’Assas, Paris. B. at Narbonne. M.D.,
1862; Agrégé de Clinic., Med. Fac.; Member Acad. de Méd.

Author of “Études sur les fermentations proprement dites et les
fermentations physiologiques et pathologiques,” Paris, 1869; “Chimie
appliquée à la physiologie, à la pathologie et à l’hygiène et les
méthodes de recherches les plus nouvelles,” Paris, 1874.

“Made experiments with the venom of snakes (_Naja
tripudians_).”--_Archiv. de med._, Vol. 2, 1881, p. 360.


=Gavarret, Louis-Denis Jules=, 73, Rue de Grenelle, Paris. B. 1809. M.D.,
1843; Prof. Med. Physics at Med. Faculty; Mem. Acad. of Medicine, 1858;
Inspector-General of Public Instruction for Medicine, 1879.

Author jointly with M. Andral of “Investigations sur la nature du
sang et l’organisation physique de l’homme,” 1840-43; “Sur la chaleur
produite par les corps vivants,” 1853. “Des Images par reflexion et par
refraction,” Paris, 1856. “Physique biologique, les phénomènes physiques
de la Vie,” Paris, 1869, etc., etc.


=Gergens, E.= M.D.; Asst. at Physiol. Inst., Strasburg.

Author of “Ueber gekreutzte Reflexe,” Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. XIV., p.
340; “Einige Versuche ueber Reflexbewegung mit dem Influenz-Apparat,”
Pflüger, Vol. XIV., p. 65. Joint author (with E. Baumann) of “Ueber das
Verhalten des Guanidin, Dicyanidin, und Cyandin im Organismus,” Pflüger,
Vol. XII., p. 205. Assisted Prof. Goltz in his work, “Ueber Verrichtungen
des Grosshirns.”

Made experiments jointly with E. Baumann on dogs and rabbits, also on the
brains of the former.

“… I dissected out the above-mentioned nerves in some of the animals I
had used before, and tried direct stimulation. Naturally even a weak
current must have a powerful effect, when in immediate contact with the
nerve, and the result was as I had anticipated. The animals croaked
once and made the wildest efforts to escape.…”--“_Einige Versuche ueber
Reflexbewegung_,” pp. 67-68.


=Gerlach, Leo.= M.D., Erlangen.

Author of “Ueber die Beziehungen der N. Vagi zu den glatten Muskelfasern
der Lunge,” Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. XIII., p. 491.

Made experiments on curarised dogs and rabbits in the Laboratory of Prof.
Kühne, in Heidelberg, also in the Physiological Institute at Erlangen.


=Gibbes, Heneage=, 94, Gower Street, W.C. M.D., Aberd., 1881, M.B. and
C.M., 1879; L.R.C.P., Lond. 1879; (Univ. Aberd. and St. Barthol.); Mem.
Gen. Counc. Univ. Aberd.; Fell. Roy. Micros., Med., and Zool. Socs.; Mem.
Path. Soc., Phys. Met. Disp.; Lect. on Physiol. and Histol. West. Hosp.;
late Curator Anat. Mus., King’s Coll.

Author of “Practical Histology and Pathology,” 2nd edit. Contrib. various
papers to Quart. Journ. Micros. Sci., Lancet, etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the Laboratory and Outhouse in the
garden, 94, Gower Street, W.C., 1883. Certificate dispensing with
obligation to kill same year. Dr. Gibbes could also perform experiments
at the Physiological Laboratory and Anatomical Theatre, King’s College,
London._


=Gibson, George Alexander=, 1 Randolph Cliff, Edinburgh. M.D. Edin.,
1881; M.B. Edin., and C.M. 1876; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1880; M. 1879 (Edin.
Dub. and Berlin); Mem. Gen. Counc. Univ. Edin.; F.R.S.E.; F.G.S. Lond.;
Hon. Mem. (late Pres.) Dialec. Soc. Edin.; Mem. Brit. Association for
Adv. of Sci.; and British Med. Assoc.; Lect. on Med. Anat. and Phys.
Diagnosis, Edin. Sch. Med.; formerly Demonstrator of Anat. Univ. Edin.

Contrib. to _Lancet_, Rep. Brit. Assoc. for Adv. of Sci., Nature, Journ.
Anat. and Physiol., etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Veterinary College, Clyde Street,
Edinburgh Laboratory and Physiological Class Room in 1879, and at
University Edinburgh Materia Medica Department, in 1880. Certificates for
Testing previous Discoveries in 1879 and 1880. No experiments returned in
1879._


=Gierke= (Dr.) Asst. Prof. Physiol. Inst., Breslau University.


=Glaevecke, Ludwig Christian H. J.= M.D. First Asst. Clin. Hosp. at Kiel,
1881.

Author of “Ueber die Ausscheidung und Vertheilung des Eisens im
thierischen Organismus,” Kiel, 1883.

Made experiments on animals to ascertain the effects of subcutaneous
injections of iron.


=Gluck, Theodor.= M.D. Asst. Inst. Clinic. Surg. Univ. of Berlin.

Extirpated sections of lungs in rabbits and dogs, and hopes to persuade
the medical profession to sanction extirpation and resection of the lungs
as a method of operative surgery.--_Archiv. fuer Klinische Chirurgie von
Langenbeck, Billroth, Gurlt_, Vol. 26, p. 916, Berlin, 1881. (See Block.)


=Golding-Bird, Cuthbert Hilton=, 13, St. Thomas Street, London, S.E. B.A.
Lon. (Honours), 1867; M.B. (Honours, Gold Medal in For. Med.), 1873;
F.R.C.S. Eng. (Exam.), 1874; L.R.C.P. Lond., 1872 (Guy’s and Paris);
Prizem. 1869-71-72; Gold Medallist in Chir. Med., and in Chir. Surg.,
1873; Mem. Path. and Chir. Socs.; Assistant Surg. and Demonst. of Pract.
Physiol., Guy’s Hosp. Contribs. to _Lancet_, _Brit. Med. Journ._, _Guy’s
Hosp. Reps._, &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Guy’s Hospital School Buildings
in 1881; also Certificate for Illustrations of Lectures, 1881. No
Experiments returned._


=Golgi, M. C.= Prof., Pavia.

Experiments on cerebral localization.--_Archiv. Ital._

Author of “Di una reazione apparamente nera delle cellule nervose
ottenuta col bicloruro di mercurio.”--_Arch. p. l. scienze mediche_, Vol.
III., 1879, N. 11.


=Goltz, Friedrich.= Direct. of Inst. for Exper. Physiol., Strasburg;
formerly prosector Univ. Königsberg, Prussia.

Author of “Beiträge zur Lehre von den Functionen der Nervencentren des
Frosches,” Berlin, 1869; “Verrichtungen des Grosshirns,” 1881; “Wider die
Humanaster,” 1883; “Ueber die physiologische Bedeutung der Bogengänge des
Ohrlabyrinths,” Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. III., p. 172.

“I owe the fundamental idea of my method of experimentation to the memory
of my experience as prosector at Königsberg. I have often dissected out
the arteries of the brain filled with torpid matter.… I resolved to try
whether it would be possible to rinse out the living brain and spare the
larger veins. The very first effort was so successful that it encouraged
me to proceed, and that was the origin of this work.… All my experiments
were made on dogs which I chloroformed before the operation. To bare
the skull, I generally made first a cut in the centre and separated the
skin on one side, so that the muscles of the temples were visible. Then
according to the experiment I wished to make, a portion of the muscle was
cut away to expose the place in the bone where the hole was to be bored.
According to the requirements of the case, one, two, or still more holes
were bored, and after making a cut in the head skin, the brain matter
was rinsed out. I generally used spring water, heated to the temperature
of the blood.… At all events till now, as far as my knowledge of the
literature of this subject goes, no one has succeeded in making such
extensive destruction of the brain and still preserving life. I have
succeeded in a series of experiments made at different intervals, in so
seriously injuring one hemisphere, that all the circumvolutions that
touched the skull had disappeared. The animal lived for weeks with its
crippled brain, and served for many observations.”--_Verrichtungen des
Grosshirns_, pp. 3-8. (A work dedicated to his “English Friends.”)

“It is not often that two physiologists agree in matters relating to the
physiology of the brain.”--_Ibid._, p. 9.

“I do not by any means claim that my researches can be of any value in
themselves for the pathology of the human brain. Let the pathologists
continue steadily to collect facts, then the apparent contradictions
between the experiments on animals and the observations at the bedside
will soon be reconciled.”--_Ibid._, p. 176.

“The fact that both in tortoises and in toads, the extirpation of the
cerebellum and the superior two-thirds of the bulbus _does not abolish_
the sense of equilibrium, proves that the too widely generalised theory
of Goltz which localises this sense in the cerebellum, as also that of
Vulpian, who in the inferior vertebrates, places the seat of this sense
in the part corresponding to the annular protuberance of the superior
vertebrates, are both equally inexact.--Florence, June, 1883.”--FANO,
“_Recherches expérimentales sur un nouveau centre automatique dans le
tractus bulbo-spinal._”--_Arch. ital. de Biol._, Vol. III., p. 368.

“It is self evident, that Goltz’s experience, when quoted against
the localizations of functions in the cortex of the brain is of no
worth.”… (p. 11). “Professor Goltz’s assumption that irritation sets up
inhibitory processes, having their seat in the cerebrum, which cause,
through paralysis of certain centres situated in the cerebellum and its
connections, all the non-permanent disturbances,--this assumption is
inadmissible” (p. 13).--Munk, _Ueber die Functionen der Grosshirn-Rinde._

“After I had laid bare the bone behind the ear of the pigeon, I bored
out, bit by bit, with the help of a sharp hollow chisel, the ear
labyrinths on both sides of the head. The bleeding caused by this
operation is very considerable. In those cases where I endeavoured
to destroy entirely both labyrinths, the birds died soon after the
operation with violent rolling movements or somersaults. For this reason
I afterwards contented myself with breaking out pieces of the superficial
canals. Many of the thus injured birds I have kept alive a long time, and
especially two which I had operated upon half a year ago, and which I
exhibited at the Congress of Naturalists at Innspruck on 21st September,
1869.”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. III., pp. 177-78.

“The sanguinary part of the operation begins with the insertion of the
cannula to supply artificial respiration. Then the right carotid artery
is dissected out. Afterwards, while artificial respiration is being
set up, a square opening is made in the left wall of the chest with a
knife and the bone scissors. The opening is extended far into the right
pleural cavity, and widened downwards till it reaches the diaphragm
which is severed from the ribs. It is best to make the opening in the
chest large enough to avoid any pressure on the heart from the lungs or
other neighbouring parts. The pericardium is opened wide so that the
greatest possible surface of the heart may be exposed to the action of
the atmospheric air. After this sanguinary preparation the catheter is
introduced from the right carotis into the aorta, and from thence to
the left ventricle of the heart. As soon as it has reached this point
(which fact can be ascertained by feeling the exposed heart) the stopper
(of the instrument previously described) is withdrawn. The next systole
sends a powerful stream of blood into the catheter, which is immediately
checked by fixing the gutta percha end of the previously set manometer
on this conducting catheter. Now begins the observation which richly
repays the tedious and bloody preparation. The heart pumps out the
manometer with surprising rapidity.… We have repeated this experiment six
times.”--“_Ueber die Druckverhältnisse im Innern des Herzens_,” Pflüger’s
_Archiv._, Vol. XVII., p. 113.


=Gombault= (Dr.), 3, Rue Rouget-de-l’Isle, Paris. Prof. Path. Anat.
Practical Courses.


=Greenfield, William Smith=, 7, Heriot Row, Edinburgh. M.D. Lond., 1874;
F.R.C.P. Lond., 1879; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1881; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1872; (Univ.
Coll.); Fell. Univ. Coll. Lond. and Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path.
and Clin. Socs.; Fell. Roy. Micros. Soc.; Prof. of Gen. Path. and Clin.
Med. Univ. Edin.; late Asst. Phys. and Lect. on Path. Anat. St. Thomas’s
Hosp.; Prof. Superint. Brown Inst.; Phys. Roy. Infirm. for Childr. and
Wom., Waterloo Road; Phys. Roy. Hosp. for Dis. of Chest, and Med. Regist.
St. Thomas’s Hosp.

Trans. “Magnan on Alcoholism;” “Lancereaux’s Atlas of Pathological
Anatomy.” Author of Sect. on “Renal Pathology,” new Syd. Soc. Atlas
of Path.; (jointly) “Report on Pyæmia and Allied Diseases” (for Path.
Soc. and Loc. Govt. Board), 1879. Contrib. “Lectures on the Pathology
of Anthrax and Allied Diseases,” Lancet and Brit. Med. Journ., 1880 and
1881; various papers in Trans. Path. and Clin. Socs. and elsewhere.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Brown Institution, Laboratory Stables
and Post Mortem Room, in 1879-80-81. Certificates for Experiments without
anæsthetics in 1879-80-81. No experiments returned in 1881._


=Gréhant, Louis François Nestor=, 17, Rue de Berthollet, Paris. B. at
Laon, Aisne, France, 1838. M.D. Asst. curator at the Museum of Nat.
Hist., Paris; formerly Mem. Biol. Soc., Paris; _préparateur_ of the
Course of Physiol. at Fac. of Sci.

Author of “Tableau d’analyse chimique conduisant à la détermination de
la base et de l’acide d’un sel inorganique isolé, avec les couleurs
caracteristiques des precipités,” Paris, 1862; “Recherches physiques sur
la respiration de l’homme,” Paris, 1864; “Manuel de physique médicale,”
Paris, 1869; “Sur l’endomose des gaz à travers les poumous détachés,”
Gaz. Med. de Paris, 1878; “Sur l’activité physiologique des reins,”
_Ibid._, 1879; “Recherches quantitatives sur l’èlimination de l’oxyde
de carbone,” _Ibid._; “Recherches comparatives sur l’exhalation de
l’acide carbonique par les poumons,” Journ. de l’Anat. et Physiol., 1880;
“Influence de la section des pneumogastriques sur l’exhalation d’acide
carbonique par les poumons” Arch. pour les Sci. Med. 1882.

“Dr. Gréhant recently made an interesting communication to the Biological
Society, on the quantity of alcohol that would be necessary to produce
fatal effect. With this view he performed a series of experiments, the
results of which were always identical. By means of an œsophagal tube,
Dr. Gréhant injected into the stomach of a dog thirty grammes of alcohol
every half hour until the animal died. At the post-mortem examination, he
found that the blood of the animal contained a proportion of one part of
absolute alcohol to 100 parts of blood.”--_Lancet_, Jan. 20th, 1883, p.
125.

“I prepared in a large gutta percha balloon a mixture of 100 litres of
air and 255 cubic centimetres of pure oxide of carbon, which made 1/392
of poisonous gas; I then opened the jugular vein in a dog of 9 kilos.,
and with a long india-rubber catheter introduced into the vena cava
inferior, drew out 30 centimetres of blood, put it into a flask and
defibrinised it by agitating it a few minutes. The animal’s head was then
placed in a gutta percha muzzle communicating with the top of the balloon
containing the oxide of carbon, and the animal was allowed to breathe
into it for half-an-hour. During the last two minutes a second quantity
of blood was taken from the vena cava and defibrinised; then the animal
was allowed to breathe in the air, and half-an-hour later a third sample
of blood was taken.…”--_On the absorption of Oxide of Carbon_ (Note
presented to the Acad. of Sc. by M. Gréhant, April 8, 1878,) _Archives de
Méd._, 1878, Vol. I., p. 750.


=Griffini, L.= Prof. Path. Anat. Lab. Univ. of Messina.

Author of “Sur l’action toxique de la salive humane,” Arch. ital. de
Biol., Paris, 1882.

“After the experiments of Vulpian showing that the saliva of a healthy
man has a poisonous effect on rabbits, it was necessary to seek for an
explanation of this unforeseen result. Therefore, the author of this
essay determined to make a series of experiments to explain the malady
which is produced in rabbits by the subcutaneous injection of human
saliva.”--_Arch. ital. de Biol._, Vol. II., Part I., p. 106.


=Groves, J. W.=, King’s College, London.

_Held a License for Vivisection at King’s College Physiological
Laboratory in 1881 and 1882. No experiments returned._


=Gruber, A.= Prof. Zool. and Zoot., Freiburg, in Baden University.


=Grützner, P.= Prof. Animal Physiol., Berne University.

Author of “Ueber Verschiedene Arten der Nervenerregung.” Pflüger’s
Archiv, Vol. XVII., p. 215; “Beiträge zur Physiologie der Harnsecretion,”
Ibid., Vol. II.

Made experiments on dogs and rabbits in the Physiological Institute at
Breslau.

“Exp. II. Dog not curarised: spinal marrow cut through at the beginning
of the operation; also the vagi severed, nitrate of soda injected.

“Exp. III. Dog strongly curarised, and the medulla stimulated repeatedly
by galvanic currents. Injections of nitrate of soda.

“Exp. VII. Dog curarised; nerves of the left kidney torn through, medulla
subjected to electric stimulation. The vagi cut through.

“Exp. XI. Dog curarised; nerves of the left kidney torn through,
digitalis and strychnine injected. Result cramps.”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._
Vol. II., p. 370.


=Gscheidlen, Richard.= M.D.; Prof. Physiol.; Direct. Physiol. Lab.,
Wurzburg.

Author of “Ueber einige Physiologische Wirkungen der Calabarbohne,”
in “Untersuchungen aus dem Physiologischen Laboratorium in Wurzburg,”
Leipsig, 1869; “Physiologische Methodik,” 4th edit., Brunswick, 1879.

Forty-one experiments on rabbits and cats.

“… Large doses cause violent cramps and convulsions. The animal struggles
for breath, and writhes on the board to which it is fastened, and all the
symptoms of the most violent dyspnœa set in. If the skin of the animal
is slightly raised, it can be observed that the venous blood-vessels are
puffed and swollen and contain dark blood. It soon becomes impossible to
see how the animal breathes, and death follows.”--_Untersuchungen aus dem
Physiologischen Lab. in Wurzburg_, 1869, p. 275.


=Guareschi, I.= Univ. Turin.

Extract of putrified human brains injected into frogs, results resembling
those of curare. Communicated to R. Academy Sciences, Turin, May, 1882.


=Gubler, Adolphe Goblet.= B. at Metz, 1822, d. 1879. Studied Med. Paris;
Silver Medallist, 1847; M.D. Paris, 1849; Chef de Clinique of Prof.
Bouillaud, 1850; Mem. Acad. Med., 1865; succeeded Prof. G. See, Prof.
Therapeutics, 1868.

Founded “Journal de Thérapeutique,” 1874; Author of “Commentaires
Thérapeutiques du Codex,” 1867.


=Guébhart= (Mons.), Paris. Prof. Physics Medical Faculty.


=Günther, Albert=, Surbiton, Surrey. M.A. and Ph.D. Tübingen, 1853; M.D.
1862; Diploma in Med. and Surg. Stuttgart, 1857; F.R.S.; F.Z. S.; Mem.
Royal Soc. Sc. Upsala; Corr. Mem. Bristol Nat. Soc. and Liverpool Lit.
and Phil. Soc.; Assist. Keeper Zool. Dept. British Museum.

Author of “Medical Zoology,” Stuttgart, 1858; Catalogue “Fish,” British
Museum, 1859-70, &c.; late Editor “The Record of Zoological Literature.”

Made experiments jointly with L. Brück on the influence of lesions of
certain portions of the brain on animal heat.--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, 1870,
p. 578.

“… I requested the students, Messrs. Brück and Günther, to repeat the
experiments of Tscheschichin and Sewitzky.… The animals were, as in
previous experiments, rabbits. The lesions were invariably made through
the unopened skull.… Out of 23 experiments, 11 gave positive, and 12
negative results. These experiments have given us the following facts
for further study:--The division of the brain between the pons varolis
and the medulla oblongata may produce heightened temperature. Seven
experiments of this section were made; in two only the results were
as above; but in these two cases the evidence was in a high degree
satisfactory. In four cases the temperature sank after the operation;
in one the action was so positive that the temperature of the animal
which had been bound for seven hours did not sink any lower after the
operation, which it is well known generally happens.”--Heidenhain,
Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. III., pp. 579-80.

_Held a License for Vivisection (no place named) in 1882. Also
Certificate for Experiments without anæsthetics same year._


=Hall, Marshall.= B. at Basford, Notts., 1790; d. 1857. M.D., Edin.,
1812; M. 1827; F.R.C.P., 1841; Lect. on the Theory and Practice of
Medicine at St. Thomas’ Hosp.; Consulting Phys. to Moorcroft Lunatic
Asylum, Uxbridge; Gulstonian Lecturer Roy. Coll. Physicians, 1842;
F.R.S.L., and E.

Author of “The Principles of Diagnosis,” London and Nottingham, 1817;
“Medical Essays,” London and Nottingham, 1825; “Diseases of Females,”
1826; “Effects of Loss of Blood,” 1828; “Researches principally relative
to the morbid and curative effects of loss of blood,” London, 1830; “An
essay on the circulation of the Blood, especially as observed in the
minute and capillary vessels of the Batrachia and of Fishes,” London,
1831; “Lectures on the nervous system and its diseases,” London, 1836;
“Memoirs on the nervous system,” London, 1837; “Practical observations
and suggestions in medicine,” London, 1846; “Essay on the theory of
convulsive diseases,” London, 1848.


=Hällsten, K.= Prof. Physiol. in Helsingfors, Finland.

Author of “Handledning för nybegynnare vid histologiska öfningar” (Manual
of practical histology for beginners), Helsingfors, 1878. Contrib. to
Scandinavian Med. Archives.

Made experimental researches on the irritability of various parts of the
same nerve.


=Harley, George=, 25, Harley Street. M.D. Edin., 1850; F.R.C.P. Lond.,
1864; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1858; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1850; F.R.S.; F.C.S.; Corr.
Mem. Roy. Acad. Med. Madrid; Roy. Acad. Sci. Bavaria; Phys. and Med.
Soc. Wurzburg; Med. Soc. Halle, and Micros. Soc. Giessen; Mem. Path. Soc.
Lond.; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc. Lond.; Mem. Roy. Med. Soc. Edin., etc.,
etc., formerly Prof. Med. Jurisprudence and Lect. on Histology and Pract.
Physiol. Univ. Coll.; Pres. Paris Med. Soc.

Editor of “A Year Book of Medicine, Surgery and their allied Sciences,”
London, 1860, etc.; author of “On Digestion,” 1859; “Action of Chem. and
Phys. Agents on the Blood,” Phil. Trans. 1865; “Jaundice, its pathology
and treatment,” London, 1863; “Albuminaria, with and without Dropsy, its
different forms and treatment,” London, 1866; “Diabetes, its different
forms and different treatments,” London, 1866, etc.

Made experiments on the physiological action of animal poisons, on dogs,
cats, and frogs.

“The experiments were performed at University College, in the presence of
my colleagues, Professors Sharpey, Ellis, and Williamson.… A large dog
was bitten by one of the snakes over the right eye.… In three minutes
the dog became very restless, and gave a low whine as if of pain. After
moving about the room for ten minutes searching for a comfortable place
to lie down on, he placed himself in the coolest part of the chamber, and
laid his head on the cold stones, as if to relieve headache. He moaned
as if in distress.… As the effects of the poison passed away, the pulse
gradually recovered.… The serpent was once more allowed to bite him. The
same train of symptoms again appeared, but in a more intense degree, and
within twenty-five minutes he had become insensible.… Half an hour after
being bitten the second time, convulsive twitchings began to appear in
the fore limbs and muscles of the neck. In ten minutes more the whole
body became convulsed. The limbs were stretched out and the head jerked
backwards.… In two hours and a quarter the animal appeared to be dead,
but on making an incision into the thorax, he gave a gasp. After waiting
some time without observing any further sign of life, another incision
was made, when he again gasped, but only once.”--“_On the influence of
physical and chemical agents upon the blood_,” _Trans. Roy. Soc._, Vol.
155, p. 700.


=Harris, Vincent Dormer=, 39, Wimpole Street, Cavendish Square, London,
W. M.D. Lond., 1876; M.B. (Honours), 1874; M.R.C.P. Lond., 1877; M.R.C.S.
Eng., 1874 (St. Barthol. and Vienna); Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem.
Path. Soc.; Sen. Phys. Met. Disp.; Demonst. of Physiol. St. Barthol.
Hosp.; Asst. Phys. Victoria Pk. Hosp.; late Assist. Phys. W. London
Hosp.; Casualty Phys., House Phys., Ophth. House Surg. and Regist. St.
Barthol. Hosp.

Joint Author of “The Manual for the Physiological Laboratory;” Author of
“Remarks on Angina Pectoris,” “Tufnell’s Treatment of Aortic Aneurysm,”
“The Diagnostic value of Cardiac Murmurs,” and other papers in St.
Barthol. Hosp. Reps.; “Condition of the Spinal Cord in Tetanus;” Path.
Soc. Trans.; Contrib. to Lancet, Med. Times Gaz., Path. Soc. Trans.,
Quart. Micros. Journ., Journ. Anat. and Physiol., &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital Medical
School in 1880-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures,
1880-81-82-83. No Experiments returned in 1880 and 1882._


=Harting= (Prof.), Utrecht University.


=Harvey, Reuben J.= D. 1882. B.A. Dublin, 1866; M.D., 1873; M.B. and
M. Ch., 1870; F.K.Q.C.P. Irel., 1879; L. 1876 (T.C. Dublin, Vienna and
Wurzburg); M.R.T.A.; Mem. Path. Soc. Dub.; Lect. Physiol. Carm. Sch. of
Med.; Asst. Phys. and Pathol. House of Indust. Hosps.; Phys. Cork Street
Fever Hosp.; late Exam. Anat. Univ. Dub.; Phys. for Dis. of Throat; Nat.
Eye and Ear Infirm.; Ex-Schol. and Sen. Moderator T.C. Dub.; Ex. Med.
and Schol. and Demonstrator of Anatomy Univ. Dub. Contrib. “Histology of
Tendon,” Irish Hosp. Gaz. 1873; “Ueber die Zwischensubstanz der Hoden,”
Centralblatt, 1875.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Carmichael School of Medicine, Dublin
Physiological Laboratory, and 212, Great Brunswick Street, Dublin, in
1878-79-80-81. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures in 1878-79-81;
also, Certificate Dispensing with obligation to kill in 1881, and
Certificate for Experiments without Anæsthetics in 1880._


=Haughton, Edward=, Spring Grove House, Upper Norwood. M.D. Edin., 1856;
M.R.C.S. Eng., 1855; B.A.T.C.D., 1858; L.M. Combe Lying-in Hosp. Gold
Medal in Exper. and Nat. Sci.; Lect. on Med. Jurisprudence Steeven’s
Hosp. Med. Sch. Dub., 1859.

Author of “The Laws of Vital Force,” 1869; “Practical Biopathy,” 1881,
etc.


=Hay, Matthew=, 230, Union Street, Aberdeen. M.D. Edin. (Gold Medal),
1881; M.B. and C.M. (First Class Honours), 1878 (Univs. Glasg., Edin.,
and Strasbourg); Ettles Prizem. 1878; Goodsir Prizem. 1881; Sanitary
Research, Sch., 1883; Fell. Roy. Phys. Soc. Edin.; Vice-Pres. Chem. Soc.
Edin,; Mem. Nat. Sci. Club; Prof. Med. Logic and Med. Jurisp. Univ.
Aberd.; formerly Asst. to Prof. of Mat. Med. and Demonstrator of Pract.
Mat. Med. Univ. Edin.; Phys. New Town Disp. Edin.

Contrib. “Action of Saline Cathartics,” from Anal. and Physiol. Vol. XVI.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Edinburgh Materia Medica
Department in 1880-81-82-83. Certificates Dispensing with obligation to
kill in 1880-81-82-83._


=Haycraft, John Berry.= M.B.

Author of “On some Physiological Results of Temperature Variation,”
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin., 1878.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Edinburgh Physiological
Department and Materia Medica Department, or Department of Medical
Jurisprudence in 1880 and 1881. No experiments returned in 1881._


=Hayem, Georges=, Rue de l’échelle 9, Paris. B. Paris, 1841. M.D. 1868;
Prof. Med. Fac. Paris; Hospital Physician; Sub-Director of the Lab. of
Path. Anat. (école des Hautes études); Editor of the Revue des Sciences
Médicales.

Author of “Études sur les diverses formes d’encéphalite,” Paris, 1868;
“Des Bronchites, Pathologie générale et classification,” Paris, 1869;
“Des Hémorrhagies intra rachidiennes,” Ibid., 1872.


=Heger, Paul.= Prof. Physiol. Univ. Brussels.

Author of “Étude critique et expérimentale sur l’émigration des lobules
blancs, envisagée dans ses rapports avec l’inflammation.”


=Heiberg, H.= Prof. Path. Anat. Christiania, Norway.

Author of “Om Hvirvelsöjlen hos nyfödte og dens Forhold til chorda
dorsalis” (The spinal chord at birth and its relation to the chorda
dorsalis) Norsk Magas. for Lägevidens-Kab., Vol. VIII. (1879), p. 292.

Made experiments on the cornea of rabbits, rats, cats, fowls, toads,
&c.--_Vide_ _Appen. Rep. Roy. Com._


=Heidenhain, Rudolph Peter Heinrich.= B. at Marienwerder, West Prussia,
1834. Prof. of Physiol, and Microscopic Anat. Med. Fac. Breslau; Lect.
Physiol. Institute.

Author of “Physiologische Studien,” Berlin, 1856; “Die Vivisection im
Dienste der Heilkunde,” Leipsig, 1879; “Beiträge zur Kenntniss des
Pancreas,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. X., p. 557; “Ueber die Absonderung
der Fundusdrüsen des Magens,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XIX., p. 148.

“The following observations, in so far as they relate to temporary
fistula, were made in the summer of 1872; … those relating to permanent
fistula belong principally to a series of experiments made with the
students, Messrs. Jastrow, Langondorff and Körner. The principal results
of both series proved that the secretion of the pancreas if arrested
may be made to _continue_; or if present may be rendered more active.
However, I must at once observe that the disturbances, the causes of
which are still unknown to us, which almost invariably render useless all
experiments on the pancreas, were also often present in those I am about
to describe.…

“The experiments were invariably made on curarised animals. In such
cases we have noticed the striking fact when the rapidity of secretion
had been measured before and after curarisation, there was always
a diminution during the curare anæsthesia, in contradiction to the
result of Bernstein’s experiments; in which the secretion increased
under the influence of the poison.” “_Beiträge zur Kenntniss der
Pancreas._”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. X., pp. 606-607.

Permanent fistula of the stomach established in dogs, then they were
curarised and the spinal marrow stimulated with electrodes to cause
secretion from the pancreas. These experiments were undertaken with the
aid of students.


=Heinsius von A.=, M.D., Prof. Physiol., Leyden University.

Author of “Ueber die Eiweisskörper des Blutes,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol.
II., p. 1; “Ueber Serumalbumin und Eieralbumin und ihre Verbindungen,”
Pflüger, Vol. XII., p. 549.


=Helmholtz-Hermann, Ludwig Ferdinand von.= B. Potsdam, 1821; studied med.
La Charité, Berlin; Military Surgeon, Potsdam; Prof. Anat. Acad., 1848;
Prof. Physiol., Königsberg, 1849; Prof. Physiol., Bonn, 1855; Heidelberg,
1858; Prof. of Experimental Physics, Med. Fac., Berlin Univ., 1871; Corr.
French Acad. of Sciences, 1870; Privy Councillor.

Author of “Ueber die Erhaltung der Kraft,” Berlin, 1847; “Handbuch der
Phys. Optik.,” Leipsig, 1856-1866; “Lehre von den Tonempfindungen,”
Brunswick, 1862, etc.


=Henderson, Thomas Beath=, 239, Bath Street, Glasgow. M.D., Glasgow,
1878; M.B. and C.M., 1871 (Univ. Glasg.); Mem. Med. Chir. Path. and Clin.
Socs. Glasg., and Brit. Med. Assoc.

Contrib. “On the Inhalation of Phosphuretted Hydrogen,” Journ. Anat. and
Physiol., Vol. XIII.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Glasgow Royal Infirmary Medical
School, 1878-79-80. Certificates Dispensing with obligation to kill,
1878-79-80. No Experiments returned in 1879 and 1880._


=Henle, Frederick Gustav Charles. B.= at Furth, Franconia, 1809. Studied
med. at Heidelberg and Bonn; M.D., 1832; Prosector Anat. Museum, Berlin,
1837; Prof. of Micros. Anat. and Gen. Path., 1840; Prof. Anat. and
Physiol. Univ. Zurich, 1844; Prof. Anat. Physiol. Path. and Anthrop.,
Heidelberg, 1852; Prof. at Göttingen.

Founder of “Journal der rationelle Medizin;” Author of “Ueber Schleim u.
Eiterbildung,” Berlin, 1838; “Vergleichende Anatomie des Kehlkopfes,”
Leipsig, 1839; “Pathologische Untersuchungen,” Berlin, 1840; “Rationelle
Pathologie,” Brunswick, 1846; “Handbuch der Allgemeinen Anatomie,”
Berlin, 1841; “Handbuch der Systematischen Anatomie des Menschen,”
Brunswick, 1855; etc.


=Henry, Arthur.= Student at Physiol. Instit., Breslau.

Made experiments with Paul Wollheim at the instigation of Prof.
Heidenhain on the pancreatic secretion of herbivorous animals, sheep, and
rabbits--during two semesters--by creating biliary fistulas.--Pflüger’s
_Archiv._, Vol. XIV., p. 457, etc.


=Hensen, V.= Prof. experimental Physiol., Kiel University.

Author of “Ein einfaches Verfahren zur Beobachtung der Tonhöhe eines
gesungenen Tones,” Archiv. f. Anat. u. Physiol., 1879, p. 155.


=Hering, E.= Prof. of experimental Physiol., Prague University.

Author of “Beiträge zur allgemeinen Nerven-und-Muskelphysiologie,”
Sitzber. d. k. Akad. d. Wiss. (Wien) Vol. LXXIX., 1879; “Ueber
Muskelgeräusche des Auges,” _Ibid._; “Zur Erklärung der Farbenblindheit
der Theorie der Gegenfarben,” Prag., 1880; “Kritik einer Abhandlung von
Donders,” Prag., 1882.


=Hermann, Ludimar.= Prof. Physiol. and Med. Physics, Zurich Univ.

Author of “Grundriss der Physiolgie des Menschen,” Berlin, 1863;
“Untersuchungen ueber den Stoffwechsel der Muskeln,” Berlin, 1867;
“Ein Beitrag zum Verständniss der Verdanung und Ernährens,” Zurich,
1869; “Lehrbuch der experimentellen Toxicologie,” Berlin, 1874; “Ueber
schiefen Durchgang von Strahlenbündeln, etc.,” Zurich, 1874; “Die
Vivisectionsfrage für das grössere Publicum beleuchtet,” Leipsig, 1877.
Editor of “Centralblatt f. die Medicinischen Wissenschaften,” Berlin,
1863, etc.

“Our experiments were intended to decide how far the objection raised on
several sides was justified, that the results of the experiments made by
Fritsch and Hitzig on the cortex of the cerebrum did not arise from the
excitation of the cortex itself, but of the more internal parts.… The
experiments were made during the summer term of 1874, all on middle-sized
dogs, and were carried out successfully.… There were only six; as the
results were all the same, there was no reason to make more of these
cruel experiments.… I conclude with the remark that the experiments of
Fritsch and Hitzig, however interesting and precious they may be, do not
justify any conclusions concerning the functions of the cortex.”--“_Ueber
electrische Reizversuche an der Grosshirnrinde_,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._,
Vol. X., pp. 78-84.

“The advancement of our knowledge, and not utility to medicine, is the
true and straightforward object of all vivisection. No true investigator
in his researches thinks of the practical utilization. Science can afford
to despise this justification with which vivisection has been defended in
England.”--_Die Vivisectionsfrage._


=Herzen, Alex.= B. Russia, 1839. Prof. Physiol., Lausanne University.
Studied Medicine and Natural History in England and Switzerland; joined
Schiff at Florence, and became one of the promoters of the new scientific
and philosophical movement in Italy. He afterwards retired to Sienna,
where he pursued in solitude his studies on experimental Physiology.
Prof. Physiol. at the Instituto superiore at Florence, 1877.

Author of “Popular Comparative Anatomy of the Lower Animals,” London,
1862; “Les centres modérateurs de l’action réflexe,” Turin, 1864; “Sul
l’eccitabilitá dei nervi tagliati,” 1867; “Analisi fisiologica del
libero arbitrio humana,” 1868; “Gli animali martiri i loro prottettori e
la Fisiologia,” Florence, 1874; “Una questione di Psicologia Sociale,”
1871; “Cos ’è la Fisiologia,” Florence, 1877; “Lezione sulla digestione,”
Florence, 1877; “Il Moto psichico e la Coscienza,” Florence, 1877; and in
French a volume of “Récits et Nouvelles.”


=Hifberg= (Dr.), Christiania University.


=His, Wilhelm.= B. at Bâle, 1831; studied med. at Bâle and Berlin, under
J. Müller; Prof. Anat. and Physiol. Bâle, 1857; Prof. Physiol. Leipsig,
1872.

Author of “Crania Helvetica,” Bâle, 1864; “Ueber die erste Anlage des
Wirbelthierliebs,” Leipsig, 1868; “Unser Körperform und das phys.
Problem ihrer Einstehung,” Leipzig, 1875. Contrib. to “Archiv. für
Anthropologie” and “Archiv. f. Anatomie;” “Ueber die Anfänge des
peripherischem Nervensystems” Arch. f. Anat. und Physiol., 1879, p.
456; “Abbildungen ueber das Gefässsystem der menschlischen Netzhaut und
derjenigen des Kaninchens,” Ibid., Vol. f., 1880, p. 224; “Die Lehre vom
Bindesubstanzkeim,” Ibid., 1882, p. 62.


=Hitzig, Eduard.= B. Berlin, 1838. Studied Berlin and Wurzburg. M.D.,
Berlin, 1862. Private Instructor in Internal Medicine Univ. Berlin, 1872.
Prof. Mental Diseases, Zurich, and Director of the Lunatic Asylum of the
Canton, 1875. Prof. of Pathology and Therapeutics of the brain, Med.
Fac., Halle University.

Author of “Krankheiten des Nervensystems,” in “Handbuch der speciellen
Pathologie in Therapie;” “Untersuchungen ueber das Gehirn,” Berlin, 1874;
“Ziele und Zwecke der Psychiatrie,” Zurich, 1876.

“Experiments on the extirpation of the cerebrum, furnished the material
of a work in which Goltz imagines he has refuted the opinions expressed
by me on the functions of this organ. I had already made jointly with
Herr Fritsch a small number of analogous experiments, concerning the
portion named by me, gyrus E; but later I carried out the experiments
in a systematic manner on the whole convexity of the cerebrum. In the
last series some observations are published in which I thought to have
given the last and most uncontestable proof of the localisation of the
brain.”--“_Untersuchungen ueber das Gehirn_,” _neue Folger, Reichert und
Du Bois Reymond’s Archiv._, 1876, p. 692.


=Holmgrén, F.= Prof. Physiol., Upsala University.

Contrib. “Ueber die wirkliche Natur der positiven Stromschwankungen bei
der einzelnen Muskelzuckung” to Du Bois Reymond’s Archives for 1871;
“Ueber den Augenabstand der Farbenblinden,” Arch. f. Ophthalmol., Vol.
XXV., p. 135; “Ueber die Retinaströme,” Untersuch. a. d. Physiol. Inst.
3d. Heidelberg, 1880.

“There is a poison (curare) which lames every spontaneous movement,
leaving all other functions untouched. This venom is therefore the most
cruel of all poisons. It changes us instantly into a living corpse,
which hears and sees and knows everything, but is unable to move a
single muscle, and under its influence no creature can give the faintest
indication of its hopeless condition. The heart alone continues to
beat.”--_Holmgrén, Physiology of present Times_. _Future_, 1868, p. 231.


=Hoppe-Seyler, F.= Prof. of Physiol. Med. Fac. Strasburg Univ.; Director
of Physiol. Chem. Lab.

Author of “Med. Chem. Untersuchungen,” Tübingen, 1871; “Physiologische
Chemie,” Berlin, 1879; “Ueber die Ursache der Athembewegungen,” Centralb.
f. d. Med. Weis., No. 51; “Ueber das Methämoglobin,” Zeitschr. f.
physiol. Chemic, 1882.


=Hoppe, I.= Prof. extraord. Clin. Med., Med. Fac. Bâle University.


=Horsley, Victor Alex. Haden.= 129, Gower Street, W.C. Prof. Supt. of
Brown Institution, 1884. M.B. Lond. and B.S. (Univ. Schol. and Gold
Medallist in Surg.), 1881; F.R.C.S. Eng., 1883; (Univ. Coll.); Fell. Roy.
Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path. Soc.; Surg. Regist. (late House Surgeon)
Univ. Coll. Hosp.; Asst. to Prof. of Path. Univ. Coll.

Author of “Report on Septic Bacteria,” Rep. Med. Off. Loc. Govt. Bd.;
(with Dr. Mott) “On the Existence of Organisms in Living Tissues,” Journ.
Physiol., Vol. III; (with Dr. Bastian) “Arrest of Development of Left
Upper Limb associated with an Extremely Small Right Ascending Parietal
Convolution,” “Brain,” Vol. III.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, London; New
Physiological Theatre and Physiological Laboratory with Curator’s Rooms
in 1881 and 1882. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures, and for
dispensing with obligation to kill in 1882. No experiments returned in
1881._


=Horvath, Alexis.= M.D., Kieff.

Author of “Beiträge zur Physiologie der Respiration,” Pflüger’s Archiv.,
Vol. XIII.; “Zur Abkühlung der Warmblüter, Pflüger, Vol. XII., p. 278.

Dogs and rabbits plunged up to the neck in freezing water.


=Houckgeest, van Braam.= Military surgeon, Amsterdam.

Author of “Untersuchungen über Peristaltik des Magens und Darmencanals,”
Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. VI., p. 266, 1872.

Cut away the abdominal walls of rabbits, substituting glass, in order to
observe the peristaltic action of the intestines. Also placed rabbits in
a bath, then cut open the abdomen, keeping the head above water, so as
to allow the N. splanchnicus to be dissected out. This nerve, he states,
is easier to find in a small, thin male rabbit after it has been kept
fasting for 24 hours. Subsequent to this the nerve was acted upon by a Du
Bois Reymond’s apparatus. The animals invariably died after a period of
from one to five hours.


=Hughes, Jas. Stannus=, 1, Merrion Square West, Dublin. M.D. Qu. Univ.
Irel., 1864; F.R.C.S.T., 1844; L. 1838; L.M. Dub. Lying-in Hosp.;
Vice-Pres. Path. Soc. Dub.; Mem. Counc. Surg. and Zool. Socs., Irel.;
Corr. Fell. Med. Soc. Lond.; Surg. Lord-Lieut.’s Household, Dub. Castle;
Prof. of Surg. R.C.S.T.; Exam. in Surg. Queen’s Univ. Irel.; Surg. Jervis
St. Hosp.; Cons. Surg. Coombe Lying-in Hosp.; Surg. Convalescent Home,
Stillorgan; formerly Surg. Gen. Disp.

Author of “A Treatise on Diseases of the Prostrate Gland,” 1860; Contrib.
“On Diseases of the Spinal Column,” Dub. Med. Press, 1850; “Ulcers of
the Lower Extremities, etc.,” Ibid., 1851; “Opium in Peritonitis, with
Cases,” Dub. Hosp. Gaz., 1856.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Royal College of Surgeons Dublin
Physiological Lecture Room in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. No experiments
returned in 1881-82-83._


=Huiziga= (Dr.), Groningen University.

Author of “Ueber die Unerregbarkeit der Vorderen Rückenmarkstänge,”
Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. III., p. 81.


=Huxley, Thomas Hy.=, 4, Marlborough Place, St. John’s Wood, N.W. B.
Ealing, 1825. M.R.C.S. Eng., 1862 (Char. Cross); Ph. D. Breslau; LL.D.
Edin., Dub. and Cantab.; Knt. of the Order of the North Star (Sweden),
Pres. R.S.; Fell. Linn., Geol. and Roy. Med. Chir. Socs.; Mem. Anthrop.
Inst. of Haarlem; Corr. Mem. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, Roy. Soc. of
Sci. Göttingen, Inst. of France, and Acads. of Berlin and St. Petersburg,
etc., etc. Prof. Biol. Normal Sch. of Sci. and Roy. Sch. of Mines; late
Exam. in Phys. and Comp. Anat. Univ. Lond.; F.R.C.S. 1883.

_Held a License for Vivisection (no place named) in 1882. Certificate for
experiments without Anæsthetics, 1882._

Author of “The Oceanic Hydrozoa,” 1857; “Evidence as to Man’s Place in
Nature,” 1863; “Lectures on the Elements of Comparative Anatomy,” 1864;
“Elementary Lessons in Physiology,” 1866-67; “An Introduction to the
Classification of Animals,” 1869; “Lay Sermons,” 1870; “Manual of the
Anatomy of Vertebrated Animals,” 1871; “Critiques and Addresses,” 1873;
“Elementary Biology,” 1875; “Manual of the Anatomy of Invertebrated
Animals,” 1877; “American Addresses,” 1877; “Physiography,” 1878; “The
Crayfish: An Introduction to the Study of Zoology,” 1880; “Science and
Culture,” 1881; numerous Memoirs in Trans. Roy., Linn., Zool., and Geol.
Socs., etc.

“The following ‘Lessons in Elementary Physiology’ are primarily intended
to serve the purpose of a text book for teachers and learners in boys’
and girls’ schools.”--“_Lessons in Elementary Physiology_,” London, 1866,
Preface, p. 1.

“If the vessels of a limb of a living animal be tied in such a manner as
to cut off the supply of blood from the limb, without affecting it in any
other way, all the symptoms of death will set in. The limb will grow pale
and cold, it will lose its sensibility and volition, the animal will no
longer have power over it; it will stiffen, and eventually mortify and
decompose.”--_Ibid._, p. 74.

“If in a living animal, the anterior roots of a spinal nerve be cut,
the animal loses all control over the muscles to which that nerve is
distributed, though the sensibility of the region of the skin supplied by
the nerve is perfect.… On the other hand, if the end of the sensory root
connected with the trunk be irritated, no apparent effect is produced,
while, if the end connected with the cord be thus served, violent pain
immediately follows.”--_Ibid._, p. 268.


=Israel, James.= M.D.; Chief Phys., Jewish Hosp., Berlin.

“On the 26th of March this year (1883), I inserted a small portion of
infected tissue out of the peripleural abscess of a patient suffering
from primary aktinomykosis of the lungs through an incision into the
abdomen. The rabbit showed no symptoms of illness during life; the
patient died.… The rabbit was killed June 12th, 1883. In the abdomen
were found a number of swellings from the size of a cherry to that of
a grain of hemp seed.… This gives the first proof of the possibility
of transmitting aktinomykosis from man to animals.… Evidently the
rabbit is not a very favourable subject for the development of this
disease.”--_Centralblatt für die Med. Wiss._, No. 27, July 7th, 1883, p.
481-82.


=Jacobson, H.= Prof. Med. Fac. Berlin Univ. Lect. Dis. of Heart and Exp.
Path., 1883.


=Jäger, S. de.= Prof. Vet. Coll., Utrecht; formerly Asst. Physiol. Inst.,
Leyden.

Author of “Over de bloedsbeweging in de Longen,” Leiden, 1879; “Die
Lungen circulation und der arterielle Blutdruck,” Pflüger’s _Archiv_,
Vol. XXVII., p. 163, &c.


=James, Alexander=, 11, Albyn Place, Edinburgh. M.D. Edin. 1876; M.B.
and C.M., 1872; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1877; (Univ. Edin.) Mem. (late Pres.)
Roy. Med. Soc. Edin.; Mem. Med. Chir. Soc. Edin.; Lect. on Insts. of Med.
and Clin. Med.; Edin. Sch. of Med.; late Med. Off. New Town Disp., House
Surgeon Liverp. Infirm. for Childr., Res. Phys. Clin. Wards and Res.
Surg. Roy. Infirm. Edin.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Surgical Hall, Edinburgh, Dr. James’
Room in 1879 and 1880. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures 1879
and 1880._


=Jankowski, K. W.=, Moscow, M.D.

Author of “Ueber die Bedeutung der Gefässnerven für die Entstehung des
Oedems.”--Virchow’s _Archiv._, Vol. 93, Part II., Aug., 1883.

“Experiment I., July 24, 1882. Morphium injected into the vein in the
front paw of a large dog. Complete narcosis followed immediately. Both
hind feet were bound tightly together with an india-rubber band and
immersed in water warmed to 70 degrees. The feet were held under the
water about two minutes till the hair could be easily pulled out of the
skin; then they were taken out of the water and untied. After this, the
Nervus ischiadicus on the right side was cut through. About half-an-hour
afterwards both feet showed signs of inflammation. They began to swell
rapidly, and pustules filled with transparent matter appeared between
the toes. On both sides the lymph vessels were now dissected out, and
armed with cannulæ. To excite the flow of lymph the legs were pumped up
and down every ten minutes for about five minutes at a time.… Two hours
after this experiment the dog died, probably from the excessive dose
of morphium injected.”--“_Ueber die Beudetung der Gefässnerven für die
Entstehung des Oedems_,” Virchow’s Archiv, Vol. XCIII., p. 269.

Nineteen similar experiments on dogs were made in the Pathological
Institute at Leipzig.


=Jennings, Chas. Egerton=, London Hospital, E.; and Abbey House,
Malmesbury, Wilts. L.R.C.P., London, 1881; M.R.C.S. Eng. and L.S.A.,
1881 (Lond. Hosp.); Obst. Schol. 1880; Fell. Obst. Soc.; Mem. Brit. Med.
Assoc.; Res. Acc. (formerly House Phys.), Lond. Hospital; late Clin.
Asst. Roy. Lond. Ophth. Hosp.

Author of “Transfusion; its History, Indications, and Modes of
Application.” Contrib. “Treatment of Hydrophobia by Curara,” “Lancet,”
1881; “The Intravenous Injection of Fluid for Severe Hæmorrhage,” Ibid.,
1882; “The Morbid Anatomy and Pathology of Hydrophobia,” Ibid., 1882.

_Held a License for Vivisection, and performed experiments at the Museum,
Theatre, and Lecture Rooms of Guy’s Hospital, up to 2nd December; also,
at Physiological Laboratory and Museum of the University of the Durham
College of Medicine, 1883. Certificate dispensing with the obligation to
kill, same year._

Experiments on transfusion.--_Lancet_, Vol. II., 1884, pp. 364-6.


=Jolyet, F.= Prof. Med. Fac. Bordeaux, Exper. Med. 1877.

Author of “Nouvelles recherches sur le nerf pneumogastrique, démontrant
que les filets originaires de ce nerf, avant tout anastomoses, possèdent,
chez le chien une fonction motrice propre sur l’œsophage et sur
l’estomac.”--_Gaz. Med. de Paris_, 1879, No. 6, p. 72.


=Kaess, C.= M.D. Prosector, Giessen.

Articles in Eckhard’s Beiträge, X., 1883.

Experiments on dogs.


=Kahler, O.= Prof. extraor. Univ. Prague; Lect. Dis. of Spine.

Author of “Weitere Beiträge zur Pathologie und pathologischen Anatomie
des Central nervensystems” (jointly with Pick) Arch. f. Psychiat.,
Vol. X., p. 179, 1879; “Ueber die Noë’sche Thermosäule,” Prag. Med.
Wochenschr. 1882, No. 47.

Injected wax into the spinal column of dogs to study the effects of
pressure on the spine.--_Zeitschrift f. Heilkunde_ (Prague and Leipsig),
Vol. III., 1882, p. 187.


=Kelsch= (Prof.) Prof. Path. Anat. Lille Med. Faculty.


=Kinberg, J. G. H.=, Stockholm. Prof. Med. and Chir. Inst.


=Klebs, Edwin.= B. 1834, Königsberg. Studied univs. Königsberg, Wurzberg,
Jena, and Berlin; Asst. Physiol. Lab. Königsberg; assistant to Virchow,
1861; Prof. Path. Anat., Berne, 1866; Prof. at Wurzburg, 1871; Prof. at
Prague, 1873; Lect. on Path. Anat., Path. Histology and Path. Chemistry
Med. Fac. Univ. Zurich, 1883.

Author of “Ueber die Aufgaben und die Bedeutung der experimentellen
Pathologie” (Inaugural Discourse Univ. Zurich), Leipsig, 1882; “Ueber
Symbiose Ungleichartiger Organismen,” Biol. Centrabl., Vol. II., Nos. 10,
11, 13.


=Klein, Emanuel,= M.D., F.R.S. Assist. Prof. Lab. Brown Instit.,
Wandsworth Road; Lect. Histol. at Med. Sch. St. Bartholomew’s Hosp.;
formerly Prof. Histology Univ. of Vienna.

Author of first section of “Handbook for the Physiological Laboratory;”
“Ein Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Structur des Zellkernes und der
Lebererscheinungen der Drüsenzellen” in Centralb. f. d. Med. Wiss. No. 17
(1879), p. 289; “Observations on the Glandular Epithelium and Division
of Nuclei in the skin of the newt,” Quart. Journ. Mic. Sci., No. LXXV.
(1879), pp. 261-404; “On the termination of the nerves in the mammalian
cornea,” _Ibid._, Oct., 1880, p. 459; “The organ of Jacobson in the dog,”
_Ibid._, July, 1882, p. 299; “The Anatomy of the Lymphatic System,” 1883,
London; “Atlas of Histology” (jointly with Dr. Noble Smith), London, 1879.

(_Chairman_) (3,538): What is your own practice with regard to the
use of anæsthetics in experiments that are otherwise painful? (_Dr.
Klein_): Except for teaching purposes, for demonstration, I never use
anæsthetics where it is not necessary for convenience. If I demonstrate,
I use anæsthetics. If I do experiments for my inquiries in pathological
research, except for convenience sake, as for instance on dogs and cats,
I do not use them. On frogs and the lower animals I never use them.
(3,539). When you say that you only use them for convenience sake, do you
mean that you have no regard at all to the sufferings of the animals?--No
regard at all. (3,540.) You are prepared to establish that as a principle
which you approve?--I think that with regard to an experimenter, a man
who conducts special research, and performs an experiment, he has no
time, so to speak, for thinking what will the animal feel or suffer.
His only purpose is to perform the experiment, to learn as much from
it as possible, and to do it as quickly as possible. (3,541.) Then for
your own purposes you disregard entirely the question of the suffering
of the animal in performing a painful experiment.--I do. (3,542.) Why
do you regard it then when it is for a demonstration?--Because I know
that there is a great deal of feeling against it in this country, and
when it is not necessary, one should not perhaps act against the opinion
or the belief of certain individuals of the auditorium. One must take
regard of the feelings and opinions of those people before whom one does
the experiment. (3,543.) Then am I wrong in attributing to you that you
separate yourself entirely from the feeling which you observe to prevail
in this country in regard to humanity to animals?--I separate myself
as an investigator from myself as a teacher. (3,544.) But in regard to
your proceedings as an investigator, you are prepared to acknowledge
that you hold as entirely indifferent the sufferings of the animal which
is subjected to your investigation?--Yes. (3,546.) Do you believe that
that is a general practice on the Continent, to disregard altogether the
feelings of the animals?--I believe so. (3,547.) But you believe that,
generally speaking, there is a very different feeling in England?--Not
among the physiologists; I do not think there is. (3553.)--_Min. of Ev.
R. Com._, London, 1876.


=Köbner, Heinrich.= Prof. in Berlin.

Author of “Uebertragungsversuche von Lepra auf Thiere.”

Experiments to give leprosy to animals.--Virchow’s _Archiv._, 88 vol., p.
282.

“One monkey, two guinea-pigs, two young white rats, one white mouse,
two rabbits, one pigeon, three eels, one mud-fish, and one frog were
inoculated in several parts of the body with leprous matter, and also
small portions of tissue impregnated with bacilli were engrafted.
Leprosy did not break out in any of the animals.”--_Note by O. Israel_,
_Centralbl. f. Wiss. Med. No. 5_, 1883, p. 79.


=Koch, Heinrich Hermann Robert.= M.D. Geheimrath. Direct. of the Pathol.
Instit. of Sanit. Med. Berlin.

“You saw the dog which was injected with a minimum quantity of tubercle
bacilli. The injection was made in the abdominal cavity, and produced an
exquisite tubercular peritonitis. Nevertheless, the dog finally recovered
entirely, and seemed perfectly well. Then the same dog was used again,
and a large number of bacilli were introduced into the abdominal cavity.
You will see that the dog is fatally ill. Now, if one attack conferred
immunity, it ought to have been impossible to produce this second attack.
Hence I do not think it possible to prevent the disease in that way, nor
do I think it necessary to try it.”--“_Dr. Robert Koch interviewed_,”
_Med. Times_, Aug. 26th, 1882, p. 255.

“The result of Koch’s inoculation experiments he (Dr. Formad)
discredited, because the successful ones had been made only on animals
that have a very strong predisposition to tuberculosis, and contract it
from inoculation of non-specific substances, while others, which were
claimed to be successful, he regarded as cases of pseudotuberculosis.
The view in regard to the bacilli tuberculosis to which Dr. Formad
inclined, was that they do not cause the disease, while it is likely that
they do ‘condition the fatal disease.’ The remarks were received with
marked interest, and were followed by a brief discussion, participated
in by Drs. Wood, Gross, Tyson, Bartholow, Cohen, and others. Some of
the speakers seem to have adopted Koch’s views, and it was spoken of
as a matter of congratulation that one so well fitted as Dr. Formad
should have presented the arguments against them, since the truth
would be arrived at all the more surely if the new doctrine were put
upon its defence, and not allowed to establish itself without due
scrutiny.”--_Philadelphia Med. News_, Oct. 28, 1882. (Reprinted in _Med.
Times_, Dec. 2, 1882.)

“Dr. Koch’s conclusions enjoy a very considerable _succès d’estime_, but
that esteem would perhaps be less were it clearly understood that the
original intention, and indeed the justification, of the method of dry
cultivation has been quietly dropped, while the method itself has been
put to a use for which it is not at all suited.”--_Med. Times_, July 15,
1882, p. 78.

“As yet we have no certain instance of animals falling spontaneously
ill of cholera in periods of cholera. All experiments also, which have
hitherto been made on animals with cholera substances, have either given
a negative result, or, if they were said to give a positive result,
they were not sufficiently supported by evidence, or were disputed by
other experimenters. We occupied ourselves, nevertheless, in the most
careful and detailed manner, with experiments on animals. Because great
value must be laid on the results on white-mice obtained by Thiersch. I
took fifty mice with me from Berlin, and made all kinds of experiments
on them,” but … “our mice remained healthy. We then made experiments
on monkeys, cats, poultry, dogs, and various other animals that we
were able to get hold of; but we were never able to arrive at anything
in animals similar to the cholera-process.… Hence, I think, that all
the animals on which we can make experiments, and all those, too,
which come into contact with human beings, are not liable to cholera.…
We must, therefore, dispense with them as a material for affording
proofs.”--_Koch’s_ “_Address to the German Board of Health_,” “_Brit.
Med. Journ.,”_ Sept. 6, 1884, p. 454.


=Kölliker, Rudolph Albrecht.= B. 1817, at Zurich; Studied Univs. Zurich,
Bonn, and Berlin; For. Asst. to Henle, M.D., Zurich, 1843; Prof. Physiol.
and Comp. Anat., Zurich, 1845; Prof. at Wurzburg, 1847.

Author “Handbuch der Gewebelehre des Menschen, für Aertzte und
Studirende,” Leipsig, 1852; “Entwickelungsgeschichte des Menschen und
der Höheren Thiere,” Leipsig, 1861; “Untersuchungen ueber die Letzten
Endigungen der Nerven,” Leipsig, 1862 (in progress).


=Krabbe, H.= M.D.; Prof. of Physiol. and Anat. at Roy. Vet. Coll.,
Copenhagen.


=Kraft= (Dr.), Breslau. Asst. Prof. at the Path. Institute.


=Kries, J. Von.= Prof. Univ. Freiburg in Baden; Lec. Physiol. Movement
and Sensation, Physiol. Inst.

Author of “Untersuchungen zur Mechanik des quergestreiften Muskels,”
Arch. f. Anat. und Physiol., Vol. for 1880; “Die Gesichtsempfindungen und
ihre Analyse,” Arch. f. Physiol., 1882 (Supplement).


=Krivoratow, M.=, Moscow. Medical Student Strasburg; pupil of Prof. Goltz.


=Kronecker, H.=, 35, Dorotheenstrasse, Berlin. Prof. Extraor. Physiol.
Univ. Berlin; Lect. Exper. Physiol.

Author of “Die Unfähigkeit der Froschherzspitze, elektrische Reize
zu summiren,” Verhandl. d. physiol. Gesell. zu, Berlin, May 16,
1879; Co-editor (with Senator) of “Centralblat für die medicinischen
Wissenschaften.”

Made experiments jointly with Dr. Theodore Cash in the Physiological
Institute in Berlin.


=Kueltz, E.= Prof. Med. Fac. Marburg University; Exam. in Physiol. Lect.
on Physiol. of Sensory Organs, 1883.

Author of “Beiträge zur Lehre von der Glycogenbildung in der Leber,”
Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XXIV., 1880; “Ueber die Schicksale des
Chloralhydrates und Butychloralhydrates im Thierkörper,” _Ibid._, Vol.
XXVIII., 1882.

Made experiments in the Physiol. Lab. Univ. of Marburg.


=Kühne, W.= Prof. of Experimental Physiol. Med. Fac., Heidelberg
University.

Author of “Ueber künstlichen Diabetes bei Fröschen,” Göttingen, 1856;
“Myologische Untersuchungen,” Berlin, 1860; “Ueber die peripherische
Endorgane der motorischen Nerven,” Leipsig, 1862; “Untersuchungen
ueber das Protoplasma und die Contractilität,” Leipsig, 1864; “Ueber
das Verhalten des Muskels zum Nerven;” Untersuchungen aus dem physiol.
Institute d. Universität, Heidelberg, Vol. III., 1879; “Notiz ueber die
Netzhautfarbe belichteter menschlichen Augen,” _Ibid._, Vol. III., 1879;
“Beobachtungen ueber die Absonderung des Pancreas” (jointly with Lea),
_Ibid._, Vol. II., 1882.


=Kussmaul, Adolf.= B. 1822, at Graben, near Carlsruhe; studied at
Heidelberg and Wurzburg; Military surgeon in Baden, 1848; Prof. extraord.
Univ. of Heidelberg, 1857; Prof. Med. Erlangen, 1859; Prof. Freiburg,
1863; Prof. Strasburg, 1876.

Author of “Die Entwickelungs--Phasen der exacten Medicin,” “Ueber die
Ursachen und den Gang unseres Ablebens,” Freiburg, 1866; “Zwanzig Briefe
über Menschenpocken und Kuhpockenimpfung,” Freiburg, 1870; jointly (with
Tenner); “Untersuchungen zur Natur-Lehre des Menschen und der Thiere,”
1856; “Untersuchungen ueber Ursprung und Wesen der fallsuchtartigen
Zuckungen bei der Verblutung so wie der Fallsucht überhaupt,” Frankfort,
1857.

“For all those who do not hold the view that words and thoughts originate
from sources above and outside the nerve substance, the localization of
the functions of speech in portions of the cortex follows as a necessary
postulate of logic.… Physiological Experiment, as we might expect, leaves
us here in the lurch.”--Art. “Disturbances of speech,” _Ziemssen’s
Cyclopedia of Medicine_, Vol. XIV., p. 720.


=Laborde, J. V.=, 15, Rue de l’École-de-Médecine, Paris. Prof. Pract.
Physiol., Pract. Courses.

Chief Editor of the “Tribune Médicale.”

Experimented (30th April, 1884), with the head of the decapitated
criminal, Campi, by transfusing the blood of a living dog into it,
bringing back a hideous semblance of lifelike motions.


=Lacerda (M.) de=, Rio de Janeiro.

Injected snake poison under the skin of dogs, rabbits, monkeys, and
guinea-pigs to try the effect of permanganate of potash as an antidote.


=Landois, Leonard.= B. Munster, 1837; Stud. and Asst. at Physiol. Inst.,
Greifswald; Prof. extraord., 1868; Prof. in ord. Physiol. and Dir.
Physiol. Inst., 1872; Prof. Micros. Anat., Histol., and Exper. Physiol.
Med. Fac., same place, 1883.

Author of: “Lehrbuch der Physiologie des Menschen,” Vienna, 1879-80;
“Ueber tönende Vocal-flammen,” Centralb. f. d. Med. Wiss. No. 18, 1880,
p. 321.


=Lankester, Edwin Ray=, M.A., F.R.S. B. 1847, London; Educated St. Paul’s
School, and Christ Ch., Oxon; Fell. and Lect. Exeter Coll., Oxford, 1872;
Prof. Zool. and Comp. Anat. Univ. Coll., Lon., 1875; Fellow Roy. Soc.,
1875.

Author of: “A Monograph of the Fossil Fishes of the old red Sandstone of
Britain,” Part I., 1870; “Comparative Longevity,” 1871; “Contributions to
the Developmental History of the Mollusca,” 1875; and the English Edition
of Haekel’s “History of Creation.” Contrib. to “Athenæum, Academy,
Nature,” Chief Editor of “Quarterly Journal of Microscopic Science.”

“… He has taken a prominent part in the defence of Scientific Experiment
on live animals.”--_Men of the Time_, 10th Edit., p. 604.

“If you allow experiment at all, you must admit the more of it the
better, since it is certain that for many years to come the problems of
physiology demanding experimental solution will increase in something
like geometrical ratio instead of decreasing.”--E. Ray Lankester,
_Spectator_, Jan. 10, 1874.


=Lange, O.= B. 1834. Path. Lect. Univ. Copenhagen, 1877; formerly Asst.
to Prof. Schiff, Physiol. Lab., Florence.

Editor of “Hospital Journal.”


=Langendorff, Oscar.= Prof. Physiol. Med. Fac. Univ. Königsberg.

Author of “Versuche ueber die Pancreas-Verdauung der Vögel,” Mueller’s
Archiv., 1879; Contrib. to Centralb. f. d. Med. Wiss., Archiv. fuer Anat.
u. Physiol., etc.

Found by experiment that after frogs had been immersed for several hours
in oil or water, or after they had been suffocated by ligature of the
aortic bulb, their muscles had an acid reaction.--_Med. Centralb._, 1882,
No. 50.


=Langley, J. N.= M.A., St. John’s Coll., Camb.

Author of “The action of Pilocarpin on the sub-maxillary gland of the
dog,” Studies from the Physiol. Lab. Camb., Part III., 1877, p. 42. “On
the changes in serous glands during secretion,” Journ. of Physiol.,
Vol. II. (1879), p. 261; “On the structure of serous glands in rest and
activity,” Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond., 1879, p. 377; “Preliminary account of
the structure of the cells of the liver and the changes which take place
in them under various conditions,” Proc. Roy. Soc., Vol. XXXIV., 1882, p.
20.

“The sub-maxillary gland of the dog was chosen for experiment, owing to
its exposed condition, and the comparative ease with which its nerves can
be isolated; a few experiments were made on the parotid, but these were
not increased in number, since there seems little reason to doubt that
that which is true for one salivary gland is also true for the rest.…
In observing the flow of blood all the veins going to the jugular were
tied, except the veins coming from the gland; then either the jugular
was tied and cut across on the peripheral side of the ligature, and the
blood allowed to run into a narrow test tube…; or a cut was made just
at the division of the jugular, the jugular itself clamped, and the
blood collected as before.… The pilocarpin was injected sometimes into
the saphena vein, and sometimes through the facial artery direct into
the gland, in the manner described by Heidenhain.… In every case the
stimulus used was a Daniell’s Cell with a Du Bois Reymond’s induction
apparatus.”--_Studies from the Physiol. Lab. Camb._, Part III. (1877),
pp. 44, 45, 46.

Also experiments on dogs, rabbits, frogs, and toads.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Cambridge University Physiological
Laboratory New Museum in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates for
Illustrations of Lectures in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificate dispensing
with obligation to kill in 1879._


=Lannegrace= (Dr.), Montpelier. Prof. Physiol. Med. Fac., Montpelier.


=Lanzillotti-Buonsanti, Nicola.= B. Ferrandina, 1846; Studied Salerno
and Naples; Chir. Asst. Milan, 1871; Prof. 1873; Phys. and Vet. Sur.
Basilicate; Direct. Chirurg. Clinic and Prof. of Surg. and Exper.
Physiol. High School for Vet. Med., Milan.

Author of “Sulla struttura dei tendini, ricerche istologische,” Milan,
1871; “Manuale di Ostetricia Veterinaria,” Milan, 1872; “Trattato
di Patologia e Terapia chirurgica generale e speciale degli animali
domestici,” Milan, 1873; “La Medicina sperimentale e le Scuole
Veterinaria,” Milan, 1873, &c. Founded, 1878, the journal “La Clinica
Veterinaria, Rivista di Medicina e Chirurgia practica degli Animali
domestici.”


=Lapper, Edwin=, 36, Highfield Road, Rathgar, Co. Dublin. L.K.Q.C.P.
Irel., 1876 (Ledw. Sch. Dub.); Fell. Chem. Soc. Lond.; Lect. on Chem.
Ledw. Sch. of Med.

Contrib. to Dub. Journ. Med. Sci. 1876.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin,
Physiological Laboratory and Lecture Room in 1878. No experiments
returned._


=Lassègue, Jean Louis.= B. Paris, 1800.

Author of “Recherches Physiologiques et Chimiques pour servir à
l’histoire de la digestion,” Paris, 1825.

Bound the thoracic duct of dogs, death following 50 days after the
operation.


=Latschenberger, Joh.= M.D.; Prof. extraord. Physiol. Chem. Univ.
Freiburg.

Joint Author, with Deahna, of “Beiträge zur lehre von der reflectorischen
Erregung der Gefässmuskeln,” Pflüger’s _Archiv_, Vol. XII., p. 157.

Made experiments jointly with Deahna.

“We first set ourselves the task of studying the effects of blood
pressure in long continued stimulation of the ends of sensory nerves.
The animals experimented upon were rabbits, dogs and cats.… The
nerves experimented upon were the N. vagus, N. depressores, and N.
ischiadicus. After the nerve was cut through, the central end was
stimulated. The nerves in the neck were in most cases drawn outwards and
laid upon the electrodes in such a manner that the stimulated portion
should be completely surrounded by air.”--_Beiträge zur Lehre von der
reflectorischen Erregung, &c._, pp. 159, 160.


=Lautenbach, B. F.= M.D.; Ph. D. Asst. Physiol. Lab. Geneva.

Author of “On absorption without circulation,” Journ. of Physiol., Vol.
II. (1879), p. 110; “The physiological action of heat,” _Ibid._, pp. 1
and 302; “Saponin in its relation to Physiology,” Journ. of Nerv. and
Mental Diseases, Vol. IV. (1879), No. 3 (N. Series), p. 393.

Made experiments, with the assistance of Prof. Schiff, by tying the
portal veins of dogs, &c., which caused death in one or two hours in the
dog, and less in cats and rabbits.--_Philadelphia Med. Times_, May 26th,
1877.


=Lazarus, Moritz.= B. Filehne, in Posen, 1824. Prof. Philos. Bern; Prof.
Milit. Acad. Berlin, 1868.

Contrib. to “Zeitschrift für Klinische Medicin.”

Made experiments on dogs and sheep.


=Lea, A. Sheridan=, Trin. College, Cambridge. Physiol. Lab. New Museum.

Joint Author (with J. R. Green) of “Some Notes on the Fibrine Ferment,”
Journ. Physiol., Vol. IV., p. 380.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Cambridge Physiological
Laboratory New Museum, 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates for
Illustrations of Lectures in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. No experiments returned
in 1878._


=Lebedeff, Alexander.= Physician, Moscow, Russia.

Made experiments in the Physiol. Institute, Leipsig, 1882.


=Lebedoff, S. A.= Asst. Phys., St. Petersburg.

Made experiments in the Pathological Institute, Giessen, on the secretion
of hæmoglobin by the kidneys.--Virchow’s _Archiv._, Vol. XCI., p. 2.


=Legg, John Wickham=, 47, Green Street, Park Lane, W. M.D. Lond., 1868;
M.B., 1867; M.R.C.P. Lond., 1869; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path.
Soc.; Casualty Phys. and Demonstrator Morbid Anat. St. Barthol. Hosp.

Author of “On the Changes of the Liver which follow Ligature of the
Bile Ducts;” and various Papers in St. Barthol. Hosp. Reps., Brit. Med.
Journal, Journ. Anat. and Physiol., etc., etc.

“During the past winter, I have made several observations upon the
changes which follow ligature of the bile ducts in animals. The animals
used were cats; these seem to survive the operation better than dogs.
Most observers find that dogs live only five to ten days after. The
way in which the ligature was applied was as follows:--The animal was
first secured in a Czermak’s holder, and chloroform given largely, so as
to secure a deep narcosis.… A cut is then made through the linea alba
from the xiphoid cartilage downwards for about two inches.… Pushing
aside to the left the stomach and duodenum, and raising the free edge
of the liver, the bile ducts are seen coming from the liver and gall
bladder.… A ligature is then put around the common duct and tied close
to the duodenum; another is tied tightly on the duct, about half an inch
nearer to the liver, and the duct between the two ligatures divided by
a pair of scissors, the vessel being held out from the portal vein for
that purpose. In two of the cats the bile found its way again into the
intestine; in the later operations, therefore, I removed altogether about
half an inch of the common duct as is done in making biliary fistulæ.
The belly walls were then brought together with ordinary sutures. It is
well to place these close together, as I lost three of the cats from the
giving way of the sutures and consequent prolapse of the bowels. All
the operations recorded in this paper were done in the pharmacological
laboratory of my friend and colleague, Dr. Brunton.…

“Exper. I., Jan. 24, 1873.--Large tabby cat, weighing 8½ lb.; very
fat; bile ducts tied double and cut. The cat died probably on Jan. 26.
Examined on Jan. 27. Weather frosty.…

“Exper. II., Jan. 24, 1873.--Black she cat, weighing 6 lb. 6¾ oz. Bile
duct tied double but not cut. Animal pregnant. The cat died on Jan. 26.
Examined on Jan. 28.…

“Exper. III., Feb. 3, 1873.--Large tabby cat, weighing immediately after
operation 7 lb. 3½ oz. Animal very fat; bile duct tied, but not cut.
Feb. 6.--Cat seems to be dying; it is unable to stand, but lies on side
mewing. Feb. 7.--Found dead at 11 a.m. in the same place where left
yesterday.…

“Exper. VI., Feb. 3.--A cat not fully grown, very wild, scarcely any fat
on body, weighing immediately after the operation 3 lb. 5 oz. Bile ducts
tied double, but not cut. The animal nearly died under the chloroform,
but recovered with artificial respiration. Cat last seen alive on Feb.
7.… Found dead on morning of February 12, and already much decomposed.
Cause of death, prolapse of bowels.…

“Exper. XVI., June 27.--Black and white cat, well nourished, full grown.
Bile duct tied double and piece cut out. July 3.--As the cat was now very
weak, and seemed about to die, it was determined to make the diabetic
puncture. The cat was therefore laid prone, a cut made through the skin
over the occipital protuberance, and the chisel applied immediately
underneath this. After dividing the occipital bone, the chisel was
passed in a direction downwards and forwards, so as to cut the line made
by joining the two auditory meatus. The chisel was pushed on until it
met with the basilar bone, and was then withdrawn. Operation was over
at 12.30. Before the operation the cat had languidly taken a little
milk.”--“_On the changes in the Liver which follow Ligature of the Bile
Ducts_,” _Barth. Hosp. Reps._, Vol. IX., p. 161, etc.


=Lemoigne= (Prof.), Milan. Mem. Council Milanese Società Zoophila.

Author of “Relazione Sull’ Idrofobia,” 1882.


=Leopold, G.= Prof. Univ. Leipsig.

“Professor Leopold, of Leipsig, has recently carried out some experiments
of the above kind, the results of which we think it well to summarise,
seeing that English physicians are prevented by foolish legislation from
making any such researches themselves.… Dr. Leopold therefore proceeded
thus: he opened the abdomen and uterus of a pregnant animal, and then
the abdomen of one not pregnant, and transferred in some experiments the
embryo only, in others the embryo and its membranes and placenta, from
the uterus of one animal to the abdominal cavity of the other. Then he
closed the wound and observed the result. Rabbits were the animals used.…
As to the result, the experiments fall into two groups--one in which
peritonitis followed, from which the animals soon died; and the other in
which they survived, and the transplanted embryo became encapsuled.… In
the cases in which no peritonitis was excited, the animals were killed at
periods varying from three to seventy days after the operation.”--_Med.
Times and Gazette_, Jan. 14, 1882, pp. 41, 42.


=Lépine, R.=, Lyons. M.D. Paris, 1875. Prof. Medicine Med. Faculty.

Author of “De la localisation dans les Maladies cérébrales,” Paris, 1875;
jointly (with Lannois) of “Sur la maniere differente dont se comportent
les parties supérieure et inférieure de l’intestin grèle au point de vue
de l’absorption et de la transsudation,” Arch. de physiol. norm. et path.
1883, p. 93.

“The authors pursued the following methods in their experiments, which
were made solely on dogs: After opening the abdomen in the linea alba,
a portion of the smaller intestines was drawn out, and ligatures which
at first were not closed were applied to the upper and lower part;
above and below the ligatures the intestine was cut open with very fine
scissors, and rinsed out with a seven per cent. solution of salt. Then
the lower ligature was closed, and the solution injected into the upper
opening, the reabsorption of which is to be tested. While the syringe
was being withdrawn the upper ligature was also secured. A portion of
the lower end of the small intestine was then submitted to the same
process; but in this case a longer portion was taken out to compensate
as much as possible for the smaller size of the lower end of the
intestine.… After the bowels had been replaced the wound was sewn up,
and the dog set at liberty; and after a certain time--generally an hour
or an hour and a-half--killed, and the contents of the tied loops were
examined.”--_Centralb. f. d. Med. Wiss._, 1883, p. 679.


=Lesser, A.= Prof. of Toxicology, Med. Fac., Berlin University.


=Lesser, Baron Von L. L.= Prof. at Private Policlinic, Med. Fac., Leipsig
University. Path. Institute.


=Leube, Wilhelm Olivier.= B. Ulm, Wurtemberg, 1842; studied Med.
Tübingen; M.D. 1866; Univs. Munich and Berlin; studied Physiol. under Du
Bois Reymond and Rosenthal, and Physiol. Chem. under Kühne; First Asst.
Ziemssen’s Clinic, Erlangen, 1868; Prof. extraord., 1872; Prof. Med.
Clinic, Jena, same year; Prof. Erlangen, 1874.

Author of “Untersuchungen über die Strychnine-wirking und deren
Paralysirung durch künstliche Respiration,” Du Bois Reymond’s Archiv,
1867, p. 629. Contrib. to “Moleschott’s Untersuchungen,” Virchow’s and Du
Bois Reymond’s Archiv., &c.

Made experiments with strychnine on various animals.


=Lewaschew= (Dr.), St. Petersburg.

“A most careful and valuable series of experimental researches on
the influence of the nervous system in the causation of disease of
the vessels has been contributed to the current number of Virchow’s
_Archiv._, by Dr. Lewaschew, of St. Petersburg.… The method of
investigation is worthy of mention. Generally the chief nerve trunks of
the hinder extremities of dogs were the parts subject to irritation by
means of a solution of muriatic or sulphuric acid; it was found that
rabbits and cats were unfit for this continuous form of stimulation,
because the action of the acid on the exposed nerve trunk brought about
gangrene; as a strong stimulus was wanted milder means could not be
employed.”--_Lancet_, June 2nd, 1883, p. 962.

Dr. Lewaschew drew a thread moistened with acid through the nervus
ischiadicus of the one leg to set up an irritation in the nerve. At
intervals of from three to six days a thread was sewn nearer the
peripheric end of the nerve. This was continued till the death of the
animals. Some died rapidly of gangrene of the extremities and septicemia,
others at the end of two to four weeks only of putrid infection and
dysentery; many, however, supported the operation for two or four months.
Some of the animals became seized with epileptic fits, which increased
till life ended.--_Petersburg Med. Wochenschrift_, Vol. XXXI., 1880.


=Lewes, George Henry.= B. London, 1817; d. 1878.

Studied med., anat., and physiol.

Author of “On the spinal cord,” 1858; “The nervous system,” 1859;
“Physiology of Common Life,” 1860; “Aristotle,” 1864; “Problems of Life
and Mind,” etc.

“A triton whose cord had been divided some weeks was completely cut in
two. The head-half immediately began crawling away with great activity,
which, as this half contained the heart, and almost all the viscera,
was not surprising. The tail half remained for some time in a standing
posture, and then began to crawl forward. After three steps it paused,
remaining quiet during five minutes, and began again, but feebly. The
tail moved spontaneously, but with great slowness; when it was touched
both tail and legs moved. I then placed it under a glass, with a
moistened sponge inside to prevent evaporation from the skin, and left
it there for two hours, watching its spontaneous, though very languid
movements. If any reader remains still unconvinced, I can only recommend
him to divide the spinal chord of a frog a little below the shoulders,
and keep the animal for some days or weeks (care must be taken to prevent
water getting to the cord, as that soon kills the animal), watching it,
and testing its sensibility.”--_Physiol. Com. Life_, Vol. II., pp. 255-6.

“Marshall Hall reports the case of a man in whom accident had destroyed
all sensation and voluntary motion, yet who drew up his legs when they
were tickled, without once feeling the sensation of tickling.… This case
is constantly cited, and is, indeed, very striking. It seems to have a
far greater value than any experiments on animals can have, because we
cannot question animals as to their sensations; we do not _know_ whether
they feel or not. We can only infer: whereas we can interrogate the human
patient.”--_Ibid._, p. 861.

“Has performed a great many experiments (6,354), nearly all relating
to the nerves, (6,365), mostly on frogs and other cold-blooded animals
(6,357), and not more than a dozen rabbits and pigeons in a dozen years
under anæsthetics (6,361-4).… Could not himself bear to experiment on
dogs or cats (6,360, 6,379), rabbits would nearly always do instead
(6,413-7).”--_Digest Ev. R. Com._, p. 41.


=Lewin, L.= M.D. Asst. at the Pharmacol. Instit., Berlin.

Author of “Untersuchungen ueber Wirkung and Verhalten des Tannins
im Thierkörper.”--Virchow’s “_Archiv._,” Vol. LXXXI., 1880;
“Untersuchungen ueber das chemische Verhalten der Folia Uvae Ursi im
Thierkörper.”--Virchow’s “_Archiv._” Vol. XCII., 1883.

Made experiments on rabbits with tannin and other substances.


=Leyden, Ernst Victor.= B. Danzig, 1832. Studied Med. Chir., Inst.
Friedrich Wilhelm, Berlin; Milit. Surg. Dusseldorf, Danzig, Gumbinnen
and Königsberg; Battaillon Surg. Berlin, 1862-65; then Prof. and Direct.
Med. Clin. Polyclin. Königsberg; Prof. Strasburg, 1872; succeeded Traube,
Berlin, 1876; Privy Councillor in Med. affairs; Prof. Path. and Therap.,
Direct. Med. Clinic, Berlin.

Author of “Beiträge und Untersuchungen zur Physiologie und Pathologie des
Gehirns,” Virchow’s _Archiv._, Vol. XXXVII., p. 519; Editor “Zeitschrift
fuer Klinische Medecin.”

Inventor of an instrument which can be screwed into an opening made in
the skull of dogs to facilitate the study of the movements of the then
exposed brain. Injected blood of patients suffering from pneumonia into
guinea-pigs.

“Nasse and Rosenthal, but especially Leyden, had, a few years ago,
studied the effects of pressure and agitation on the functions of the
brain mass. Leyden injected a solution of sodium chloride between
the skull and dura mater. A more extended series of experimental
investigations was subsequently undertaken by Dr. F. Pagenstecher.
Pagenstecher injected a mixture of white wax and tallow heated to 50° C.
between the skull and dura mater of dogs. As regards the sensibility of
the dura mater, Leyden and Pagenstecher differ.”--Bartholow’s “_Functions
of the Human Brain_,” _Amer. Journ. of Med. Sci._, April, 1874, pp.
305-306.


=Lindgren, H. O.= Prof. Med. Fac. Lund University.


=Lingard, Alfred=, 91, Harley Street, Cavendish Square, W., M.R.C.S.
Eng., 1873; L.S.A., 1874 (St. Thos.’s, Vienna, Berlin, and Paris); Fell.
Roy. Micros. Soc.; Mem. Path. Soc., Lond., Brit. Med. Ass., Anthrop.
Inst. Great Brit. and Irel., and Soc. Anthrop. Paris; late House Phys.
St. Thos.’s Hosp.; Transl. of Fournier’s “Syphilis and Marriage;”
Contrib. “Ueber den Bau der Symphgefässe in pathologisch veränderter
Haut;” Allge. Wien. Med. Zeit. 1876; “On an Infectious Ulcerative
Disease of Skin and Mucous Membrane caused by a Specific Bacillus,”
_Lancet_, 1883.

_Held a License for Vivisection in a building belonging to Mr. George
Lacey, 213, Wandsworth Road, S.W., and situated in the Stag Yard,
opposite side of the Wandsworth Road to the above address in 1883.
Certificate dispensing with obligation to kill. No experiments returned
1883._


=Liouville, Henri.= B. Paris, 1837; D. 1882. M.D. 1870; Chief Direct.
Lab. Hôtel Dieu, 1872.

Author of “De la Généralisation des Anéurismes Miliaires,” 1871; “De
l’abus en thérapeutique,” 1875; Contrib. to various Med. Journals.


=Lister, Sir Joseph=, Bt., 12, Park Crescent, Portland Place, W. M.B.
Lond., 1852; B.A., 1847; F.R.C.S. Eng., 1852; F.R.C.S. Edin., 1855;
F.F.P.S. Glasgow, 1860; F.R.S. Lond. and Edin.; LL.D. Edin., 1878; M.D.
Dub., 1879; LL.D. Glasg., 1879; D.C.L. Oxon., 1880; LL.D. Cantab., 1880;
Knt. Comm. 1st Class, Danebrog; Fell. Univ. Coll. Lond.; Cothenius
Medallist German Soc. of Naturalists, 1877; Roy. Medallist Roy. Soc.
Lond., 1880; Laureate French Acad. Sci., 1881; Hon. Mem. numerous Foreign
Societies; Mem. of Assoc. for Advancement of Medicine by Research; Surg.
Extraord. to H.M. the Queen; Prof. Chir. Surgery, King’s Coll.

Author of articles “Amputation” and “Anæsthetics” in Holmes’s System
of Surgery; “Croonian Lecturer on Coagulation of the Blood,” Proc.
Roy. Soc.; “On Ligatures of Arteries on the Antiseptic System;” “De
l’influence qu’exerce la position du corps sur la circulation sanguine,”
paper read before Acad. de Méd., Paris, June, 1878.

Made experiments on horses and calves.

“Considers that experiments on living animals is one of the most
important means of increasing knowledge (4,291-2). Attaches very great
importance to demonstration as a means of instruction (4,339-43).” Thinks
that “demonstrations should be performed under anæsthetics, but that not
so much for the purpose of avoiding pain to the animals as for the sake
of avoiding a demoralising influence on the students” (4,328).--_Digest
Ev. R. Com._ pp. 30-31.


=Livon, Charles Marie=, Marseilles. M.D., 1873; Prof. Exper. Physiol.
Sch. Med.

Author of “Nouveau Manuel de Vivisections,” Paris, 1882; “Du Traitement
des Polypes Laryngiens,” 1873.


=Loewenfeld, L.= Prof., Munich.

Author of “Experimentelle und Kritische Untersuchungen zur
Electrotherapie des Gehirns,” Munich, 1881.

“Dr. Loewenfeld, of Munich … also made an experimental inquiry into the
effects of both currents, when applied to the brains of rabbits and
kittens, on intercranial circulation.… We cannot, however, help remarking
on an important discrepancy in the results of his experiments on animals,
of which the author himself does not appear to be aware.”--_Med. Times
and Gaz._, March 4th, 1882, p. 238.


=Loewenthal, N.= Asst. to Schiff Physiol. Lab. Geneva.

Author of “Ueber den Unterschied Zwischen der Secundären Degeneration
des Seitenstrangs nach Hirn und Rückenmarks verletzungen.”--Pflüger’s
_Archiv._, Vol. XXXI., p. 350.


=Lombardini= (Prof.), Pisa. Scuola Veterinaria.


=Longet, François Achille.= B. St. Germain-en-Laye, 1811; d. Bordeaux,
1871. Mem. Acad. Med. Paris, late Prof. Physiol. Med. Fac. Univ. Paris.

Author of “Mouvement Circulaire de la Matière dans les trois règnes,”
1866; “Traité de Physiologie,” 1850; “Recherches Expérimentales sur
les fonctions de l’epiglotte et sur les agents de l’occlusion de la
glotte dans la deglutition, le vomissement, etc.,” 1841; “Recherches
Expérimentales sur les fonctions des nerfs, des muscles, du larynx,”
1841; “Recherches Expérimentales sur l’irritabilité musculaire,” 1841;
“Anatomie et Physiologie du systéme nerveux de Phomme et des animaux
vertébrés,” 1846; “Expériences relatives aux effets de l’inhalation de
l’ether sulfurique sur le systéme nerveux,” 1847; “Du Sulfocyanure de
potassium consideré comme un des éléments normaux de la salive,” 1856;
“Fragments sur les phénomènes chimiques de la digestion,” 1857.

“His (Longet’s) experiments to confirm those of Majendie, led him to
conclusions completely opposed to those of Flourens.”--Art. “Brain,”
_Encyclopédie des Sci. Med._, Vol. XIV., 1873, p. 204.

“Experiments on animals of a different species, so far from leading to
useful results as regarded human beings, had a tendency to mislead us.
In seeking to benefit mankind by vivisections, it would be necessary to
have recourse to pathological facts founded on experiments on _human_
beings.”--_Longet, quoted in Fleming’s Essay_, p. 42.


=Lovèn, Christian.= M.D., Prof. Med. Chir. Inst. Stockholm.

Author of “Erweiterung von Arterien durch Nervenerregung,” Ludwig’s
Arbeiten, 1866, p. 1.

“I now come to the results of stimulation of the central nerves. When
a powerful unnarcotised animal was submitted to the experiment, I
observed that in most cases, the arteria auricularis became smaller
at the commencement of the stimulation. This occurred more surely and
quickly as the animal expressed its sufferings more violently by cries
and struggles. This narrowing of the artery lasted for different, but
always very short periods of time, and then gave place to an enlargement
even during continued stimulation.… This is, however, not always the case
when a great number of experiments are made.… Once it happened that in an
unnarcotised animal, immediately at the commencement of the stimulation
without any signs of narrowing a very powerful distention occurred.
This result appeared in the same animal as long as the sensitiveness
of the nerves remained sufficient to allow the experiment to be
continued.”--_Erweiterung von Arterien durch Nervenerregung, Ludwig’s
Arbeiten_, 1866, pp. 9-10.


=Luchsinger, B.= Prof. Physiology Vet. School, Berne, formerly Asst.
Physiol. Lab. Zurich; Prof. Exper. Pharmacol. Gen. Physiol. Med. Fac.
Univ. Berne.

Author of: “Zur Kenntniss der Functionen des Rückenmarkes,” Pflüger’s
_Archiv._, Vol. XVI.; “Neue Versuche zu einer Lehre von der Schweiss
secretion, ein Beitrag zur Physiologic der Nervencentren,” _Ibid._,
Vol. XIV., p. 869; “Zur Physiologie der Schweiss secretion,” Virchow’s
_Arch._, Vol. LXXVI., p. 529; “Zur Allgemeinen Physiologie der irritabeln
Substanzen,” Bonn, 1879; “Ueber gekreutzte Reflexe,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._,
Vol. XXII., p. 179, etc., etc.

Made experiments in the Physiological Laboratory of Zurich (jointly with
Drs. von Borosnyai, Steger, and Pestalozzi) on electrical stimulation of
the cerebral cortex. Also experiments on dogs, horses, cats, pigs, oxen,
and goats. Cut the nervus ischiadicus to study the action of muscarin and
pilocarpin on the excretory glands. Also experiments on cats and kittens
with Miss J. A. Kendall.

“At the sight of a strange dog, still more so on being bound to the
vivisecting table, the cat often breaks out in a violent perspiration
on all four feet. It strikes us naturally that the first thing to do is
to remove totally all these psychical influences, if it is wished to
study thoroughly other causes which may have the effect of stimulating
the perspiratory centres. A method frequently employed--narcosis--I
have purposely never used; indeed, I _never_ make use of it except for
preliminary operations. If the brain is really narcotised, the other
nerve centres must also have lost much of their excitability, lesser
degrees of narcotisation seem to me to offer very little advantage for
the purpose we have in view.”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XIII., p. 375.

“By the following experiments Luchsinger believes himself to have found
the most irrefutable proof of the existence of a really antagonistic
action of atropin and pilocarpin on the excretory glands, and to have
finally disposed of my thesis on physiological antagonism. When he had
fully convinced himself of the functions performed by the sweat glands
on the hind feet of chloroformed cats, by cutting both hip nerves,
and stimulating their peripheral ends, and also by injecting 0·01
grs. of pilocarpin under the skin of the back; when he had succeeded
in completely arresting all secretion of sweat by the injection of
0·001-0·003 grs. of atropin under the skin of the back, so that the
very strongest stimulation of the hip nerves remained entirely without
effect, he always succeeded in causing a spontaneous secretion of sweat
in the balls of the toes by the injection of 0·301 grs. of pilocarpin
either into the feet or under the skin of the back. If he injected less
than 0·001 grains of pilocarpin, the natural secretion of sweat might
not result, but could be excited by stimulation of the nerves which had
been without effect before. The feet into which no pilocarpin had been
injected remained dry and could not be brought to perspire by electrical
stimulation of the nerves. Luchsinger considers these experiments to be
practically the most simple and theoretically the most explicit, and
hence he believes that I shall also allow myself to be convinced by them
of the fallacy of my third thesis. Our experiments on the same subject
have shown us however on the contrary that Luchsinger’s theories are only
partially founded on correct observation, also that the conclusiveness of
his experiments only appears to him so simple and clear because he has
not thoroughly worked out the whole question, and has allowed himself
to be duped too rapidly by the surprising results which happened at
first.”--Rossbach, “_Neue studien ueber den Physiologischen Antagonismus
der Gifte_,” Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XXI., pp. 2-3.


=Luciani, Luigi=, 3, Via San Sebastiani, Florence. B. 1842 at Ascoli,
Piceno. Studied Univs. Bologna and Naples. Asst. Physiol. Lab. Univ.
Bologna, 1868; sent to Leipsig to study Exper. Physiol. under Ludwig,
1872; Prof. Gen. Path. Univ. Parma, 1875; Prof. Physiol. Univ. Siena,
1879.

Author of “Sulla fisiologica degli organi centrali del cuore,” Bologna,
1873; “Nacoro pretodo per la trasfusione diretta del sangue,” 1874;
“Sulla natura frenzionale del centro respiratorio” (experimental
researches made jointly with Prof. Prattili) 1874; “Sulle funzioni del
cervello,” ricerche sperimentali (with Prof. Tamburini), 1878-79, &c.

Experiments on starving dogs.--_Archiv. per le Scienze Mediche_, Vol. V.,
p. 338.


=Ludwig, Carl Friedrich Wilhelm.= B. Witzenhausen, 1816. Studied Med. at
Marburg and Erlangen; Prof. extraord. Comp. Anat. Marburg, 1846; Prof.
Anat. and Physiol., Zurich, 1849; Prof. Physiol. and Physics, Josephinum
at Vienna, 1855; Prof. Leipsig, 1865; Privy Court Councillor; Prof. at
Physiol. Inst.; Vice-President Leipsic Thierschutzverein (Society for the
Protection of Animals).

Author of “Lehrbuch der Physiologie des Menschen,” Heidelberg, 1852; “Die
physiologischen Leitungen des Blutdruckes,” Leipsig, 1865.

Inventor of an apparatus for cutting through the spinal marrow of living
mammalia, recommended by Prof. Cyon; also of an engine for measuring the
rapidity of the circulation of the blood.


=Lussana Filippo.= B. Senate, San Leone. Studied at Clusone, Bergamo and
Pavia; Prof. Physiol. Univ. Padua; Direct. Univ. Padua.

Author of “Osservazioni fisio-patologiche sul sistema nervoso,” 1856;
“Il Pancreas,” 1852: “Atropine e Belladonna,” 1852; “Patologia del
Cervelletto,” 1856; “Sperienze sul gran-simpatico,” 1857; “Fisiologia
del dolore,” 1859; “Sur la fibrine du sang,” 1866; “Fisiologia della
donna,” 1867; “Sui processi digestivi” 1868-69; “Fisiologia dei centri
nervosi encefalici,” 1871; “Sui canali semicircolari, Richerche
fisio-patologiche,” 1872; “Des centres moteurs encéphaliques,” 1877; “I
movimenti del dolore,” 1878, &c.


=Lyon= (Dr.), St. Petersburg.


=Macewen, William=, 73, Bath Street, and 5, Ure Place, Montrose Street,
Glasgow. M.D. Glasgow, 1872; M.B. and C.M., 1869; F.F.P.S. Glasg., 1874;
(Glasg.); Mem. Nat. Hist., Path. and Chir., and Med. and Chir. Socs.,
Glasg.; Lect. on Chir. Surg., and Surg. Glasg. Roy. Infirm.; Casualty
Surg. Glasg. City; late Disp. Surg. Glasg. Roy. Infirm., and Western
Infirm., Glasg.; House Phys. Roy. Infirm. and Asst. Phys. City Asyl.,
Glasg.

Author of “Wounds, in relation to the instruments which produce them;”
“Antiseptic Osteotomy for Genu Vulgum,” 1878; “Osteotomy, with an Inquiry
into the Ætiology and Pathology of Knock Knee, Bow Legs, and other
Osseous Deformities of the Lower Limbs,” 1880; “Observations concerning
Transplantation of Bone,” 1881; “On the Immediate Treatment of Wounds,”
1881; “Chromic Gut and Chicken-bone Drainage Tubes,” 1881. Contrib. to
“Glasg. Med. Journ.,” 1874; “Edin. Month. Med. Journ.,” 1875; “Brit. Med.
Journ.,” 1880.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Glasgow Royal Infirmary Medical School
1881 and 1882. Certificates Dispensing with obligation to kill in 1881
and 1882. No experiments returned in 1882._


=Mackay, J. Yule.= M.B.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the University of Glasgow
Physiological Laboratory and Physiological Class-room, 1883._


=Maclagan, Douglas=, 28, Heriot Row, Edinburgh. M.D. Edin. 1833; F.R.C.P.
Edin., 1864.; L.R.C.S. Edin., 1831 and 1833; Vice-Pres. F.R.S. (Edin.);
Prof. of Med. Jurisp., Police and Clin. Med. Univ. Edin.; Surg. Gen.
Queen’s Body Guard for Scotland; Surg.-Maj. Q.E.R.V.B.; Hon. Mem. Pharm.
Soc. Gt. Brit., etc., etc.

Contrib. Papers on Mat. Med. and Therapeutics, Pract. of Med. and Med.
Jurisp. in Edin. Med. Journs.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University of Edinburgh Medical
Jurisprudence Department in 1878 and 1879. Certificates for Experiments
without Anæsthetics in 1878 and 1879. No experiments returned._


=MacLeod, Neil=, Stoney Down, Walthamstow. M.D., 1883.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Licensee’s House, Stoney Down,
Walthamstow, 1883._


=Maier, Rudolf.= B. Freiburg, 1824. Prof. Path. Med. Fac. Univ. Freiburg.

Author of “Experimentelle Studien ueber Bleivergiftung,” Virchow’s
_Archiv._, Vol XC. (1882), p. 435.

Fed rabbits and guinea-pigs with lead.


=Majendie, François.= B. at Bordeaux, 1783; d. at Paris 1855. M.D. Paris,
1808; Mem. Acad. Science and Med. 1821; held a Professorship of Medicine
at the College of France, which he converted in 1830 into a Professorship
of Experimental Physiology.

Author of “Traité élémentaire de la Physiologie,” 1816.

Majendie was the founder of the School of Experimental Physiology,
and was so indifferent to the sufferings of the animals experimented
upon that he has been called cruel by his fellow workers, and was even
accused of having performed experiments on human beings. On the occasion
of his first visit to England he was openly accused in Parliament, but
was so warmly defended by James Mackintosh and a strong party, that the
accusation led to no result.

“I recall to mind a poor dog, the roots of whose vertebral nerves
Majendie desired to lay bare. The dog, already mutilated and bleeding,
twice escaped from under the implacable knife, and threw his front paws
around Majendie’s neck, licking him, as if to soften his murderer and beg
for mercy. Vivisectors may laugh, but I confess I was unable to endure
the heartrending spectacle.”--Dr. Latour, Lancet, No. 2,086, pp. 224-5.


=Malassez=, 168, Boulevard Saint Germain, Paris, M.D., 1873. Asst. Direc.
Lab. Histol., College of France; formerly Res. Hosp. Phys.

Author of “De la Numération des globules rouges du sang, &c.” Paris,
1873. “Sur les perfectionnements les plus récents apportés aux méthodes
et aux appareils de numération des globules sanguines, et sur un nouveau
compte-gouttes,” Arch. de Physiol. norm. et path. 1880, p. 377; “Sur la
digestion pancréatique,” _Gaz. Méd. de Paris_ No. 51, p. 1880, &c.

Extirpated the spleen of dogs; the result of these experiments being that
the dogs became mangy, and had to be killed.--_Gaz. Méd. Paris_, 1878, p.
317.


=Mantegazza, Paolo.= B. at Monza, 1831. Stud. Med. Pisa, Milan, and
Pavia; Prof. Chem. Tech. Sch., Milan; Prof. Path. Univ. Pavia; Prof.
Anthrop. Inst. di Studii Superiori, Florence; Senator; Practised Med.
in South America. On returning to Italy founded Lab. of Exper. Path. at
Pavia, the first in Europe; founder Mus. Anthrop., Florence.

Author of “Sulla America Meridionale, lettere mediche,” Milan, 1859;
“Rio de la Plata e Teneriffe,” _Ibid._, 1867; “Dell’azione del dolore
sulla respirazione,” 1867; “Un giorno a Madere,” 1868; “Profili e
paesaggi della Sardegna,” Milan, 1869; “Dizionario delle Scienze
medicale” (jointly with A. Corradi and G. Bizzozzero). _Ibid._, 1869,
etc.; “Enciclopedia Igienica popolare,” _Ibid._, 1870; “Fisiologia dell’
Amore,” _Ibid._, 1873; “Fisiologia del piacere,” _Ibid._, 1874; “Il bene
ed il male,” _Ibid._, 1874; “Il Dio Ignoto,” Florence, 1877; “Fisiologia
del dolore,” 1880.

Inventor of a machine called “The Tormentatore,” capable of inflicting
“intense,” “cruel,” “most atrocious” agony.

“The _Gazzetta Italiana di Milano_ contains an essay of Prof. Mantegazza
on experiments carried on under his direction at the laboratory of
experimental pathology of the University of Pavia. It will suffice to
state that the experiments were intended to study the action of pain on
digestion and nutrition. They were, as the Professor himself confesses,
agonising to the animals subjected to them, and distressing to the
experimenters, and simply proved that loss of appetite, great weakness,
and a peculiar imbibition of moisture were the result of the pain
inflicted. It is added that no alteration of the spinal marrow could be
detected after the agony had been protracted for _one month_. Very meagre
results of unpardonable cruelty.”--_Lancet_, March 25th, 1871, p. 415.


=Mapother, Edward Dillon=, 6, Merrion Square North, Dublin. M.D. Qu.
Univ. Irel. (with 1st Honour and Gold Medal), 1857; F.R.C.S.I. 1862; L.
1854 (Richm. Hosp., Qu. Univ. and R.C.S. Irel.); Pres. Stat. Soc. Dub.;
Prof. Physiol. and Ex.-Pres. R.C.S.I.; late Exam. Surg. Qu. Univ. Irel.

Author of “A Manual of Physiology and of the Principles of Disease,” 3rd
edit. 1832; “The Medical Profession and its Educational and Licensing
Bodies” (1st Carmichael Prize), 1868; “Lectures on Public Health,” 2nd
edit., 1867; “The Body and its Health, a Book for Primary Schools,” 4th
edit.; “Lectures on Skin Diseases,” “Hip Joint,” 1853 (obtained Gold
Medal of Path. Soc.) Contrib. to _Dublin Med. Journ._ and _Brit. Med.
Press_, etc.

_Held a License far Vivisection at Royal College Surgeons Dublin
Physiological Laboratory and Lecture Room in 1878. No Experiments
returned._


=Marey, Etienne Jules=, 11, Boulevard Delessert, Paris. B. at Beaune
(Côte d’Or), 1830; stud. Med. at Paris; M.D. 1859; Prof. Nat. History
College of France, 1869; Mem. of the Acad. of Med., 1872; and Mem. Acad.
of Sci. 1878, in the place of Claude Bernard.

“To meet the views of M. Marey a physiological station is being
established in the Bois de Boulogne. In his Laboratory at the College
of France M. Marey has been able to make a number of researches on
the physiology of the nerves and muscles; but from want of space, he
has encountered difficulties when he required to study the functional
movements of the various animals. The new physiological station of
the Bois de Boulogne, which will have a roadway of 3,500 yards in
length, will enable M. Marey to make interesting experiments on this
subject.”--_Brit. Med. Journ._, 19 Nov., 1881, p. 826.

Dr. Marey devoted himself to scientific Research, and founded a Free Lab.
of Physiology, which was for some time the only one in France.

Author of “Recherches sur la circulation du sang à l’état physiologique
et dans les maladies,” Paris, 1859; “Physiologie Médicale de la
circulation du sang,” 1863; “Études physiologiques sur les caracterès
graphiques des battements du cœur,” 1863; “Du mouvement dans les
fonctions de la vie,” Paris, 1868; “Physiologie médicale de la
circulation du sang basée sur l’étude graphique des mouvements du cœur,”
Paris, 1868; “Expériences sur la résistance de l’air pour servir à la
physiologie du vol des oiseaux,” Paris, 1869; “Mémoire sur le vol des
insectes et des oiseaux,” 1869; “Mémoire sur le Torpille,” 1873; “La
machine animale,” 1873; “Physiologie expérimentale,” 1875 (being an
account of the works carried on in his laboratory); “La méthode graphique
dans les Sciences expérimentales,” 1878.

“If it is necessary to register the movements of the heart a small
instrument invented by M. Marey is very useful. The animal is fastened on
its back to a wooden table, and its heart being laid bare, can be held
level with the abdominal region by a pair of bent tongs.”--_Traité de
Physiologie_, Béclard, Vol. II., p. 37.


=Martin, H. Newell.= M.A.; D. Sc.; Prof. Biol., John Hopkins’ University,
Baltimore, U.S.

Author of “The normal respiratory movements of the frog, and the
influence upon its respiratory centre of stimulation of the optic lobes,”
_Journ. of Physiol._, 1878, p. 131; “On the respiratory function of the
internal intercostal muscles,” jointly with E. Murray Hartwell, M.A.,
_Ibid._, Vol. II., No. 1, p. 24.

“After dividing the skin in the middle line, I have always removed a
piece of the skull with a small trephine applied in a lozenge-shaped
area which is seen to be bounded on the sides by four small vessels. The
posterior edge of the opening thus made extends back to about opposite
the posterior margin of the cerebral hemispheres, and the aperture was
enlarged with scissors until the front edges of the optic lobes came into
view. These were carefully and completely separated by a cataract knife
from the parts of the brain in front of them, and the latter were removed
from the cranial cavity; the incision in the skull being usually carried
forwards to facilitate this removal. The edges of the skin were then
brought carefully in contact, without sutures, and the animal placed
in a dish containing a little water and left until the wound healed up
… they were not fed, as experience showed me that for the week or two
during which I desired to keep them, they did better without food; or at
least without the exhausting struggle which the attempt to open their
mouths called forth.”--_Journ. Physiol._, Vol. I., p. 155.

“Dogs and cats were employed in our experiments.”--_Journ. Physiol._,
Vol. II., p. 25.


=Martin, Hippolyte=, 62, Rue de la Chaussée-d’Antin, Paris. Phys. Hos.
Dis. Children.

“M. Hippolyte Martin has presented to the Biological Society of Paris,
specimens of artificially excited tuberculosis in rabbits, resulting from
the injection of apparently inert powders (lycopodium, etc.), into the
peritoneal cavity.”--_Brit. Med. Journ._, April, 2, 1881.


=Martini, Adolfo.= M.D. Asst. Prof. Pisa Univ.


=Matthias-Duval=, 11, Rue des Martyrs, Paris. Agrégé de la Faculté.


=Mayer, Sigmund.= Prof. Histol. Med. Fac. Univ. Prague.

Author of “Speciellen Nerven Physiologie” in “Hermann’s Handbuch der
Physiologie,” Leipsig, 1879; “Studien zur Physiologie des Herzens und
der Blutgefässe;” “Ueber die Erscheinungen im Kreislaufsapparate nach
zeitweiliger Verschliessung der Aorta,” Sitzber d. k. Akad. d. Wiss.
(Wien), Vol. 79, part III., 1879; “Fortgesetzte Untersuchungen ueber die
Hemmung und Wiederherstellung des Blutstroms im Kopfe,” (11) Centralb. f.
d. med. Wiss. No. 8 (1880), p. 129; “Zur Lehre von der Herzthätigkeit,”
Prag. Med. Wockenschr., No. 14 (1880), p. 135; “Ueber ein Gesetz der
Erregung terminaler Nerven-Substanzen,” Sitzber. d. k. Akad. d. Wiss.
(Wien), Vol. 81 (1880), p. 111.


=McBride, Peter=, 16, Chester Street, Edinburgh. M.D. Edin., 1881;
M.B. and C.M., 1876; F.R.C.P. Edin., 1880; M. 1879; L. 1876 (Edin. and
Vienna); Mem. Edin. Med. and Chir. Soc.; Lect. on Dis. of Ear Edin. Sch.
of Med., etc.

Contrib. to “Journ. Anat. and Physiol.,” “Lancet,” “Med. Times and
Gazette,” etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University, Edinburgh Materia Medica
Department, in 1879 and 1880; Certificates for Experiments without
Anæsthetics in 1879 and 1880._


=McDonnell, Robert=, 89, Merrion Square, W. Dublin. A.B. and M.D. Dub.,
1857; F.R.C.S.I. (Exam.), 1853; L.M. Rot. Hosp. Dub.; (Carm. Sch. and
T.C. Dub.); F.R.S., M.R.I.A., Mem. Counc. Univ. Dub.; Mem. Path. Soc.
Dub., Roy. Zool. Soc. and Stat. Soc. Irel.; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.
Lond.; Surg. Dr. Steeven’s and Jervis St. Hosps.; late Med. Supt.
Mountjoy Govt. Prison; Asst. Surg. Brit. Civ. Hosp. Smyrna and Civ. Surg.
Med. Staff, Crimea; Ex.-Pres. R.C.S., Irel.

Author of “Lectures and Essays on the Science and Practice of Surgery;”
“Lectures on Physiology of the Nervous System,” Dub. Hosp. Gaz.;
“Observations on the Habits and Anatomy of the Lepidosiren Annecteus,”
Journ. Roy. Dub. Soc.; “On the Functions of the Liver,” 1865. Contrib.
“Physiology of Diabetic Sugar in the Animal Economy,” Dub. Quart. Journ.;
“Observs. on the Operation of Trephining the Spine in Cases of Fracture,”
_Ibid._, 1865; also to Dub. Hosp. Gas., Dr. Brown-Séquard’s Journal of
Physiology, Trans. Roy. Irish Acad., Proc. Roy. Soc., etc.; Editor of
“Colles’s Works” (Syd. Soc.)

_Held a License far Vivisection at the Royal College of Surgeons, Dublin,
Physiological Laboratory and Lecture Rooms, at Laboratory Medical
College, Dr. Steven’s Hospital, and 212, Great Brunswick Street, Dublin,
in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. No Experiments returned._

Those who desire to advance science should begin as soon as they have
passed their final examination to experiment independently in the
laboratory; did so himself, and has also made a very few experiments at
his own house, 4, 514-7.--_Digest Ev. R. Com._, p. 33.


=McKendrick, John Gray=, University, Glasgow. M.D. Aberd. and C.M., 1864;
F.R.C.P. Edin., 1872; LL.D., 1882; (Univs. Aberd. and Edin.); F.R.S.
Edin.; Prof. of Insts. of Med. Univ., Glasg.; Fuller Prof. of Physiol.
Roy. Inst. Gt. Brit.; formerly Thomson Lect. on Nat. Sci. Free Church
Coll., Aberd., 1879-80; Lect. on Insts. of Med. Extra. Acad. Sch., Edin.;
Lect. on Physiol. Dick Vet. Coll., etc., etc.

Author of “Outlines of Physiology,” 1878; various Papers on Physiological
Subjects in Trans. and Proc. Roy. Soc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University, Glasgow, Physiological
Laboratory and Physiological Class Room; also unrestricted as to place in
1878-79-80. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures in 1878-79-80._

Experiments on the eyes of living birds and mammals.

Does not see how legislation can regulate vivisection (3953-4); and
fears it would retard the advancement of science (4012); has a private
laboratory himself (3960-5); and disapproves of licensing places as
likely to inconvenience competent and earnest men.…--_Digest Ev. R.
Com._, p. 30.

“On an etherized animal, the degree of reflex stimulation produced by an
electric current of predetermined intensity in immediate contact with
the skin was noted. Afterwards the exposed cerebral hemispheres were
simultaneously stimulated, to observe whether the reflex action produced
by the first stimulation increased or diminished. This method only led to
uncertain results.”--Review of “On the inhibitory or restraining action
which the encephalon exerts on the reflex centres of the spinal cord” by
John McKendrick (_Edin. Med. Journ._, Feb., 1874, p. 733), “_Revue des
Sciences Médicales_,” Vol. IV., No. 7, p. 64.

“At this stage of the inquiry we examined the action of light on the eyes
of living animals.… We accordingly instituted a series of experiments
which were practically very troublesome. We examined the eyes--(1) of the
living cat; (2) of the living pigeon; and (3) of the living owl. In all
cases the animals were deeply under the influence of chloroform during
the experiments.

“1. The Cat.--The animal was securely fixed in Czermak’s rabbit-holder.
The skin around the orbit was reflected. The zygomatic arch was snipped
through by bone forceps, so as to expose as much as possible of the side
of the orbit. The cellular tissue of the orbit was then pushed aside
along the superior and the lateral aspect of the eyeball, so as to reach
the optic nerve with as little disturbance as possible to the vascular
arrangements of the eyeball. On exposing clearly the optic nerve, and
staunching hæmorrhage, the nerve was cut through transversely with
sharp scissors. When this was done the globe could be pulled downwards,
inwards, and forwards, so as to expose a clear transverse section of
the nerve. With the head firmly fixed, one narrow clay point was now
placed on the cornea, while the other was in contact with the transverse
section of the nerve.”--“On the physiological actions of light,” by Dr.
McKendrick and Mr. James Dewar.--_Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin._, 1876, p. 160.


=McReddie, George.= M.D. India.

“Dr. McReddie (Proceedings of the N.W. Provinces Branch of the British
Medical Ass., 1883), after injecting strychnine into dogs, has tried the
effects of antidotes on the animals, using inhalations of chloroform,
amyl nitrite, atropine, and eserine. He finds that all these remedies
are inefficacious, neither preventing the fatal result nor arresting the
convulsions.”--_Brit. Med. Journ._, May 19th, 1883, p. 973.


=McWilliam, John Alexander=, Univ. Coll., Gower Street, W. M.D. Aberd.
(highest Honours for Thesis), 1882; M.B. and C.M. (highest Acad. Honours
and John Murray Medal and Schol.), 1880; Univs. Aberd. and Edin., Univ.
Coll. Lond., and Univ. Leipsig; Demonst. of Physiol. Univ. Coll. Lond.;
late Teacher of Exper. Physics and Asst. Demonst. of Anat., Char. Cross
Hosp. Med. Schl., and Asst. in Physiol. Univ. Aberd.

Contrib. “Case of Renal Abnormality,” “Brit. Med. Journ.,” 1882.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College New Physiological
Theatre and Rooms comprised in Physiological Laboratory, together with
Curator’s Rooms, 1883; also Certificate for Experiments in Illustration
to Lectures. No experiments returned._


=Meissner, G.= Prof. Exper. Physiol. Med. Fac., Göttingen Univ.; Lec.
Physiol. Instit.


=Meren, Giovanni.= M.D., Asst. Prof. Cagliari University.


=Metzdorf, R.= Prof. Lab. Vet. School, Breslau.


=Miescher, F.= Prof. of Physiol. Med. Fac., Bâle Univ.


=Milne-Murray, Robt.=, 10, Hope Street, Edinburgh. M.A. St. And., 1875;
M.B. Edin. and C.M. (Honours) 1879; M.R.C.P. Edin., 1881 (Univ. Edin.);
Mem. Edin. Obst. Soc., late Res. Phys. Roy. Matern. Hosp. Edin.

Author of “Chemical Notes and Equations;” Contrib. to _Edin. Med.
Journ._, 1881 and 1882.

_Held a License for Vivisection, no place named, in 1882 and 1883; also
Special Certificate for Experiments without Anæsthetics same years._


=Moleschott, Giacomo.= Rome Univ. Prof. B. 1822 at Herzogenbusch. M.D.
Heidelberg (Univ. Heidelberg and Haarlem); Practised Med. Utrecht;
Private Prof. of Physiol. Chem. and Anthropol. Heidelberg, 1847; later
Prof. Physiol. Zurich; Univ. Turin 1861; naturalised Italian and Senator,
1876; Prof. Physiology Univ. Rome 1878.

Author of “Physiology of Food,” 1859; “Physiology of Transformation of
Substances in Plants and Animals,” 1851; “Physiological Sketches,” 1861;
and joint author (with Donders and Van Deen) of “Holländische Beiträge zu
den anatomischen und physiologischen Wissenschaften.”

Founded a Physiol. Lab. at Heidelberg in 1853.

“M. Moleschott’s experiments consisted in taking the liver out of animals
capable of resisting this mutilation (frogs, for instance, may survive
from eight to fifteen days). More than one hundred frogs have been thus
prepared by M. Moleschott.”--Note, Béclard’s _Traité de Physiologie_, p.
716, Vol. I., 1880.


=Mollière, Daniel.= Paris.

Contrib. to “Progrès Médical,” 1873, p. 163.

Cut the spinal nerves of rabbits and kittens to produce artificial
deformity of the spine.


=Morgan, C. Lloyd,= Prof. Geol. and Biol. Univ. Coll., Bristol; formerly
of Rondibosch, South Africa.

“I will now briefly describe the nature of my experiments:--

1. Condensing a sunbeam on various parts of the scorpion’s body.…

2. Heating in a glass bottle, as this admits of most careful watching. I
have killed some twenty or thirty individuals in this way.…

3. Surrounding with fire or red-hot embers.…

4. Placing in burning alcohol.…

5. Placing in concentrated sulphuric acid.… The creature died in about
ten minutes.…

6. Burning phosphorus on the creature’s body. I placed a small pellet of
phosphorus near the root of the scorpion’s tail, and lit the phosphorus
with the touch of a heated wire.…

7. Drowning in water, alcohol, and ether.

8. Placing in a bottle with a piece of cotton-wool moistened with benzine.

9. Exposing to sudden light.…

10. Treating with a series of electric shocks.

11. General and exasperating courses of worry.”

“I think it will be admitted that some of these experiments were
sufficiently barbarous (the sixth is positively sickening) to induce
any scorpion who had the slightest suicidal tendency to find relief in
self-destruction. I have in all cases repeated the experiments on several
individuals.”--C. Morgan Lloyd, in _Nature_, Feb. 1st, 1883.


=Moriggia= (Prof.), Rome University.


=Mosso, Angelo.= Prof. Physiol. Univ. Turin. B. at Turin, 1846. For two
years Mosso assiduously attended Schiff’s Laboratory, afterwards he
studied two years at Leipsig under Ludwig. Then he studied at Paris.
From thence he returned to accept the chair of Materia Medica at Turin,
and soon after with a subsidy from the Government and his University,
he founded the first Laboratory of experimental Chemistry in Italy. When
the Professorship of Physiology became vacant by the translation of
Moleschott to Rome, Mosso accepted it.

Author of “Movimenti dell’œsofago,” Experimental Researches (Turin,
1872); “Sopra alcune nuovæ proprieta delle pareti dei vasi sanguini,”
1873; “Sull’ azione dell’ emetico,” 1874; “Sui movimenti dell’ iridi,”
1874; “Critica sperimentale della diastole attiva del cuore,” 1874;
“Sopra un nuovo metodo per iscrivere i movimenti dei vasi sanguigni nell’
uomo,” 1875; “Sull’ azione fisiologica dell’ aria compressa,” 1875;
“Sopra Palternarsi del campo della visione,” 1875; “Sull’ azione del
cloralio,” 1875; “Tre memorie intorno alla circolazione del sangue nel
cervello dell’ nomo,” etc.

Made experiments with nitrite of amyl in the Lab. of experimental
Pharmacology of the Univ. of Turin (_Gaz. Méd. de Paris_, 1878, p. 174);
also jointly with Guarechi injected extract of putrified human brain into
animals.


=Mott, Frederick Walker=, 65, Grove Street, Liverpool. M.B., London
(Univ. Schol. and Gold Medallist in For. Med., 1st Honours in Med.) and
B.S., 1881; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1880 (Univ. Coll. and Vienna); Demonst. of
Physiol. Univ. Coll., Liverpool; late House Phys. and Opht. Asst. Univ.
Coll. Hosp., Lond.

Contrib. “Bacteria, or their Antecedents in Healthy Tissues,” Journ. of
Physiol.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the Physiological Laboratory,
Liverpool School of Medicine in 1883; also Certificate dispensing with
obligation to kill._


=Munk, Immanuel.= B. 1839. Assist. Demonst. Chem. Micros. Physiol. and
Histol. Med. Fac. Univ.; Assist. Vet. School, Berlin.

Author of “Ueber die Resorption der Fettsäuren, ihre Schicksale und ihre
Verwerthung im Organismus,” Verhandl. d. physiol. Gesell. zu Berlin, Vol.
XIII., 18 Ap., 1879; “Die physiologische Bedeutung und das Verhalten des
Glycerins im Organismus,” Virchow’s _Archiv._, Vol. LXXVI. (1879), p.
119; “Ueber den Einfluss sensibler Reizung a. d. Gallenausscheidung;”
Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. VIII.; “Physiologie des Menschen und der
Säugethiere,” Berlin, 1881.

Experiments on rabbits. Biliary fistula established. The animals then
submitted to electric stimulations.


=Munk, Hermann.= Prof. exper. Physiol. Med. Fac. Univ. Berlin.

Author of “Untersuchungen ueber das Wesen der Nervenerregung,” Leipsig,
1868; “Ueber die Sehsphäre und die Riechsphäre der Grosshirnrinde,”
Arch. f. Anat. u. Physiol., 1880, p. 449; “Ueber die Functionen der
Grosshirnrinde,” Berlin, 1880.

Made experiments on dogs and monkeys. After the destruction of their
frontal lobes, dogs showed no signs of impaired intellect, but
disturbances were produced in their hind quarters. They turned round in
the direction of the lesion, and a cat-like bending of the spine took
place. Sometimes during the first weeks the dogs held their heads down,
could scarcely seize their meat; monkeys lost their power of springing,
but their intelligence remained unimpaired. Also experimented with
electricity on the exposed muscles.--_Berl. Akad. Sitzungsber_, 1882, p.
36.


=Murrell, William=, 38, Weymouth Street, Portland Place, W. M.D.,
Brussels, 1879; M.R.C.P. Lond., 1877; L. 1875; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1875;
L.S.A. 1874 (Univ. Coll.); Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc. Lond.; Lect. on
Mat. Med. and Therap. (late Lect. on Pract. Physiol. and Med. Regist.),
Westm. Hosp.; formerly Sharpey Physiol. Schol. and Demonst. of Physiol.
Univ. Coll.; Obst. Asst. Univ. Coll. Hosp. and Res. Clin. Asst. Consump.
Hosp. Brompton.

Author of “Nitro Glycerine as a remedy for Angina Pectoris,” 1880;
“What to do in cases of Poisoning,” 1882 (jointly with Dr. Ringer);
“Action of Atropia on the Nervous System”; “Journ. Anat. Physiol.,”
1877; “Physiological Action of Aconitia,” Ibid., 1877, etc. Contrib. to
“Lancet,” “Practitioner,” etc.

Has made numerous experiments jointly with Dr. Sydney Ringer to test the
actions of various drugs on cats and frogs.

“In addition to these experiments, we have made some observations
clinically. To eighteen adults--fourteen men and four women--we ordered
ten grains of the pure nitrite of sodium in an ounce of water, and of
these seventeen declared that they were unable to take it.… One man,
a burly, strong fellow, suffering from a little rheumatism only, said
that after taking the first dose he ‘felt giddy,’ as if he would ‘go off
insensible.’ His lips, face, and hands turned blue, and he had to lie
down for an hour and a half before he dared move. His heart fluttered,
and he suffered from throbbing pains in the head. _He was urged to take
another dose, but declined on the ground that he had a wife and family._
Another patient had to sit down for an hour after the dose, and said
that it ‘took all his strength away.’ He, too, seemed to think that the
medicine did not agree with him.… The women appear to have suffered more
than the men.… One woman said that ten minutes after taking the first
dose--she did not try a second--she felt a trembling sensation all over
her, and suddenly fell on the floor. Whilst lying there, she perspired
profusely, her face and head seemed swollen and throbbed violently, until
she thought they would burst.… Another woman said she thought she would
have died after taking a dose; it threw her into a violent perspiration,
and in less than five minutes her lips turned quite black and throbbed
for hours; it upset her so much that she was afraid she would never get
over it. The only one of the fourteen patients _who made no complaint_
after taking ten grains was powerfully affected by fifteen.… The effect
on these patients was so unpleasant that it was deemed unadvisable to
increase the dose.”--Drs. Ringer and Murrell in _Lancet_, Nov. 3, 1883.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, London,
Physiological Theatre in 1878._


=Nasse, Hermann.= Prof. Med. Fac., Univ. Marburg.

Author of “Ueber die Ausfluss geschwindigkeit des Blutes aus den
Halsgefässen der Hunde und über die modification derselben durch Infusion
von Kochsalz in die Gefässe,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol. XXII., p. 513.

“Exper. No. 121, was made on a dog of about 14 kgr. weight, very thin,
whose blood was particularly poor. Blood was drawn from the carotid
artery, the jugular vein, and the vena cava superior at the same
time, the last drops of which already thickened in the glass cannula.
Respiration had ceased. Only once after a long rest, did the dog draw
a deep breath with open mouth as usually happens immediately before
death. The pulsations of the heart were scarcely perceptible. I then
tried electric stimulation of the nervus vagus, after dissecting it
out, but without causing any pulsation of the heart or breathing,
either during the stimulation or when it ceased. Death was undoubtedly
near. I then injected into the jugular vein a solution of common salt.
Tetanus followed each injection--immediately afterwards the heart began
to beat again and the blood streamed out of the arteries. When the
bleeding ceased, I again injected the solution rather weaker than at
first. No cramps followed but the flow of blood continued. The third
injection produced the same result, but death followed soon after.
The whole experiment had lasted an hour and a-half.”--“_Ueber die
Ausflussgeschwindigkeit d. Blutes_,” _etc._, Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol.
XXII., pp. 547-8.


=Naunyn, Bernhardt.= B. in Berlin, 1839. Studied at Bonn and Berlin.
Asst. Med. Clin., Berlin, under Prof. Frerichs, 1863; Prof. Med. Clinic.
Dorpat, 1869; Prof. Berne, 1871; Prof. Med. Fac. Univ., Königsberg, 1872.

Co-editor with Klebs and Schmiedeberg of “Archiv für experimentelle
Pathologie.” Author of “Handbuch der Intoxicationen” and “Handbuch der
speciellen Pathologie,” jointly with R. Boehm, 1874; jointly (with
Schreiber) of “Experiments on compression of the brain,” Arch. f. exper.
Pathol. u. Pharmak., Vol. XIV., No. 2, p. 1. Contrib. various articles to
“Du Bois Reymond’s Archiv.”; also to Ziemssen’s “Cyclopædia of Medicine.”

“The authors [B. Naunyn and Schreiber] have experimented upon dogs.
A trephine is applied to the parietal bone. A tube is inserted into
the opening thus made. Besides this another tube is brought into
communication with the cerebro-spinal cavity on a level with the swelling
formed by the meninges round the cauda equina. For this purpose it is
sufficient to take out a few of the spinal apophyses of the corresponding
vertebræ. One obtains thus, as it were, two receptacles communicating
by the intermediary of the cephalo-spinal liquid, and it becomes easy
to augment the pressure of this liquid.… Pain is one of the very first
results produced, and it is the more intense, if the pressure be
immediately brought to its greatest height. Soon, convulsions follow.
These seldom are epileptiform.… Breathing becomes slower, then irregular,
then disappears.”--_Archives Générales de Médecine_, VIIᵉᵐ. Série, Vol.
I., 1882, p. 743.


=Nepveu, G.= Surgeon, Paris; form. Res. Hosp. Sur., La Pitié Mem. Chir.
Soc. Paris.


=Newman, David=, 18, Woodside Place, Glasgow, N.B. M.D. Glasg. (with
high commendations), 1883; M.B. Glasg. and C.M. 1878; F.F.P.S. Glasg.
1881 (Univs. Glasg. and Leipsig); Mem. Philos. Path. and Clin. and Med.
and Chir. Socs. Glasg.; Exam. in Physiol. and Path. Univ. Glasg.; Extra.
Disp. Surg. Western Infirm.

Contrib. “Some Physical Experiments relating to the functions of the
Kidneys,” “Journ. Anat. and Physiol.,” etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Glasgow Physiological
Laboratory in 1879-81-82-83. Certificates dispensing with obligation to
kill in 1881-82-83. No Experiments returned at the above place. Mr.
Newman might also perform experiments at Glasgow Royal Infirmary Medical
School, and under his Certificates was not limited to a registered place._


=Nicolaides, R.= M.D.; Prof. of Physiol., Athens Univ. Contrib. to Du
Bois Reymond’s Archiv, for 1882. Made experiments in the Physiol. Lab.,
Athens.


=Nothnagel, Herrmann.= B. 1841 in Alt, Lietzgöricke, Brandenburg. Studied
at Berlin; Asst. of Leyden at Königsberg, and Instruct. at Univ., 1863;
Prof. Univ. Berlin, 1868; Prof. Breslau, 1870; Prof. Freiburg, in Baden,
1872; Prof. Clin. Med. and Path. Med. Fac. Univ. Jena, 1874.

Author of “Ueber den epsileptischen Anfall,” 1870; “Ueber Neuritis in
diagnostischer und pathologischer Beziehung,” 1870; “Die symptomologie
der Darmgeschwüre,” 1881. Contrib. to “Handbuch der Krankheiten des
Nerven systems,” 1874; and to “Ziemssen’s Cyclopædia of Medicine.”

“Nothnagel considers himself justified in concluding from his experiments
on rabbits that all the will fibres, without exception, traverse the
lenticular nucleus. This is denied by the French investigators, who
attribute the complete annihilation of voluntary movement, which
Nothnagel achieved by the injection of caustic solutions into both
lenticular nuclei, to a simultaneous destruction of the internal capsule
which, owing to the small size of the lenticular nuclei in the rabbit,
might easily have been overlooked on dissection. Nothnagel, however, has
lately published a brief statement, in which he adheres to his original
assertion.”--Kussmaul, “_On Disturbances of Speech_,” _Ziemssen’s Cyclop.
of the Pract. of Med._, Vol. XIV., London, 1878, p. 680.

“Unfortunately, the results of experiments upon animals, as respects the
exact localisation of lesions, cannot be transferred directly to the
case of man, except that we have reason to believe, through an important
experiment of Hitzig’s upon an ape, that the motor centres for the nerves
of the extremities and the cranial nerves lie in the gyrus præcentralis,
or centralis anterior (Huschke, Ecker), in other words, that affections
of the cortical substance of this convolution may produce motor
paralysis.”--Nothnagel, “_Anemia of the Brain_,” _Ziemssen’s Cyclop. of
the Pract. of Med._, Vol. XII., London, 1877, p. 152.


=Oehl, Eusebio.= B. 1827, at Lodi. Laureate in Med., Pavia, 1850; studied
Vienna, Paris, and Berlin; Prof. extraord. of Histol., Pavia, 1860; Prof.
of Exper. Physiol., 1864.

Author of “Indagini di anatomia miscroscopica per servire allo studio
della cute e dell’ epidermide palmare della mano,” Milan, 1856; “Sui
cristalli di emoglobina,” Florence, 1862; “Contribuzione allo Fisiologia
del pneumogastrico,” Naples, 1863; “Della influenza che il 5ᵒ pajo
cerebrale dispiega sulla pupilla,” Florence, 1863; “Sull’ ormento di
temperatura dei nervi eccitati,” Milan, 1865; “Manuale di Fisiologia per
Medici e studenti,” Milan, 1868-77, &c.


=Ogston, Alexander=, 252, Union Street, Aberdeen. M.D. Aberd. 1866; M.B.
and C.M. 1865; Surg. Aberdeen Roy. Infirm.; Regius Prof. of Surg. Univ.
Aberdeen.

Author of “On the functions of the semi-circular canals, &c.,” 1869.

_Held a License for Vivisection at 252, Union Street, Aberdeen,
1880-81-82. Certificates Dispensing with obligation to kill in
1880-81-82. No Experiments returned in 1882. At the expiration of Dr.
Ogston’s License the above address ceased to be registered for the
performance of Experiments._

“To ascertain the influence of pus alone, injections were first of all
made with that from cold abscesses, which contained no organisms.…
Introduced under spray into a pure subcutaneous syringe, quantities
varying from one to ten minims were injected into the subcutaneous tissue
of the back in chloroformed guinea-pigs, white mice, and wild mice. In
all twenty such injections were made, with the invariable result that
no illness or abscess ensued.… But a very different effect was produced
when similar injections were made with pus containing micrococci. In
every instance, with the qualifications to be presently made, well-marked
disease was set up. Quantities varying from one to three minims produced
in the animals already mentioned symptoms of blood-poisoning, lasting
from two to five days. The animals refused food, sat cowering in a
retired place in their cage, were listless and apathetic, their coat
was disordered and sometimes wet, their eyes were kept closed save
when startled; and the mice showed the purulent conjunctivitis and
glueing together of the eyelids described by Koch in his experiments on
septicæmia.”--_Report on “Micro-Organisms in Surgical Diseases,” Brit.
Med. Journ._, March 12, 1881, p. 371.


=Ollier, Louis Navier Edouard Léopold=, Lyons. B. 1825. M.D. Paris, 1856;
Chief Surgeon Hôtel Dieu, and Prof. Clin. Chir. Med. Faculty Lyons, 1850;
Corr. Mem. Acad. Med., 1874; Corr. Mem. Institute of France.

Author of “Des moyens chirurgicaux de favoriser la reproduction des os,”
1859; “Recherches expérimentales sur la production artificielle des os,”
1859; “Des résections des grandes articulations,” 1870; “De l’occlusion
inamovible comme méthode générale de pausement des plaies,” 1874; “De
l’éléphantiasis du nez et de son traitement,” 1876; “Traité expérimental
et clinique de la régénération des os et de la production artificielle du
tissu osseuse,” 1867; “Recherches expérimentales sur la greffe osseuse”
in Journal de Physiologie de Brown-Séquard, Vol. III., 1867.


=Oreste, Cavaliere Pietro=, Naples. Scuola Veterinaria.


=Orfila, Matthieu Joseph Bonaventure.= B. at Mahon (Minorca), 1787. D. at
Paris, 1853.

Studied the effects of narcotine on animals.

“Orfila poisoned 6,000 dogs.”--Blatin, _Nos. Cruantés_, p. 206.


=Osawa, K.=, Tokio, Japan.

Author of “Untersuchungen über die Leitungsbahnen in Rückenmarke des
Hundes.” Jointly (with E. Tiegel) of “Beobachtungen über die Functionen
des Rückenmarks d. Schlangen.”--Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XVI., p. 90.

Made experiments in physiological laboratory at Strasburg; also in the
physiological laboratory of Tokio, on the spinal marrow of serpents;
spinal marrow cut through, and burning coals afterwards applied to the
skin of the animals.


=Ott, Isaac.= Fell. in Biol., Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, U.S.A. Late
Lect. on Exper. Physiol., Univ. Pennsylvania.

Author of “Observations on the physiology of the spinal cord,” Journ. of
Physiol., Vol. II., p. 42; “On crossed hyperæsthesia,” Ibid., Vol. III.,
160; “Notes on Inhibition,” Ibid., p. 163.

“Method.--The animals employed were young cats with unpigmented feet:
These not only bear the operations better than older animals, but sweat
more easily, and the secretion is more readily observed. In cases where
the cord was to be exposed, the animal was placed belly downwards, with
a block of wood under its abdominal surface to elevate the vertebræ, and
make them more accessible. The muscles having been separated from the
vertebral arches, and held at a distance by means of weighted hooks, the
spinous processes were cut off, and a small trephine employed to make
openings, about half an inch apart through the arches. The intervals
between these openings were subsequently broken through by means of
strong cutting forceps.… To stimulate the nerves, or the central nervous
systems, a Du Bois coil was used, with Helmholtz’s arrangement to
prevent unipolar action. Tetanizing currents were employed.”--_Journ. of
Physiol._, Vol. II., p. 42.


=Paladino, Giovanni.= B. 1842, at Potenza. Studied at Naples and in all
the principal physiological laboratories of Europe, under Ludwig, Du Bois
Reymond, and Leukart. Prof. Physiol. Univ. Naples, 1867; Prof. Anat. and
Exper. Physiol. Vet. School, same place.

Author of “Istituzioni di Fisiologia,” Naples, 1878; “Lezioni d’Istologia
e Fisiologia Generale,” 1871; joint author (with Lanzilotti Buonsanti)
of “Sulla minuta struttura e sulla fisiologia dei peli tattili,” in
“Bulletino dell’ Assosazione dei Medici e Naturalisti di Napoli,” 1871,
No. 7.

“Paladino and Lanzilotti Buonsanti have studied the tactile hairs of
the various domestic animals, and of the mouse.… Section of the nervous
facialis (in the horse) and stimulation of its peripheral end produces
action of the tactile hairs. Simultaneous section of the trigeminus
reduces considerably the energy of the action caused by stimulation of
the facialis.”--_Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wissensch._, 1874, p. 116.


=Panum, P. L.= B. 1820. Prof. Physiol. and Direct. Physiol. Lab.
Copenhagen, 1863; formerly Direct. Phys. Lab. at Kiel.

Author of “Experimentelle Untersuchungen über die Veränderungen
der Mengenverhältnisse des Blutes und seine Bestandtheile durch
die Inanition,” Virchow’s _Archiv._, 1861; “Haandbog i Menneskels
Physiologie,” Copenhagen, 1872; “Untersuchungen über die Entstehung der
Misbildungen zunächst in den Eiern der Vögel,” Kiel, 1860.

Has principally experimented on transfusion, feeding, and starvation. Has
starved dogs four weeks till death occurred. A whelp was bled till death
convulsions set in and then revived by transfusion; then again bled till
even reflex movements could no longer be excited by touching the cornea,
and again revived by transfusion. This was repeated four times; but the
dog died half an hour after the last transfusion.--_Scandinavian Med.
Archives_, 1875.

“On a dog of middle size I opened the trachea and inserted into it a
glass tube.… Then I dissected out and isolated the nervi vagi; the
animal was laid on its back and the thorax opened by cutting through the
cartilage of the ribs and entirely removing the sternum. The pericardium
was now opened … and artificial respiration introduced. Partly through
the suffocation and partly through pain and terror, the movements of the
heart grew very slow, small, and irregular … but after the artificial
respiration had commenced, they got more vigorous.… Five minutes after
I cut asunder both nervi vagi, at which operation the animal uttered no
sign of pain. A minute after the movements of the heart were so greatly
accelerated that it became difficult to count them.… It struck us that
the heart seemed to have grown smaller than before we cut asunder the
nervi vagi.… Then I stimulated (irritated) the peripheric ends of the
cut nervi vagi with Neif’s electric apparatus. Almost immediately the
heart stood still in diastole.… The movements of the heart recommenced
and grew more rapid and vigorous than ever, but this soon passed away.
The ends of the nervi vagi were for a second time stimulated … and this
proceeding was repeated six times, always with the same result.… The
pain, which otherwise results from the nervi vagi being cut asunder, was
eliminated, because the far greater pain, occasioned by the opening of
the thorax, had, as every very painful operation will do, diminished the
sensitiveness of the animal so much that it gave no evidence of pain at
the cutting asunder of the nervi vagi. Without introducing artificial
respiration at the opening of the thorax, I have repeated this experiment
scores of times, and always with the same result.”--Panum, _Scand.
Medical Bibl._, 1857.

“26th Ex.: I had opened the thorax of a dog and kept its life up by
artificial respiration, having also cut the nervi vagi. Everything
had gone as we desired. The heart worked vigorously and regularly,
and the animal had full consciousness and sensitiveness. On applying
the electrodes of Neif to the heart, its regular movements ceased
immediately.”--_Ibid._, p. 134.

Prof. Panum states that he has “employed” a great number of animals
in experiments of transfusion and injections of putrid humours. For
experiments on death by embolism he has employed some eighty dogs and
rabbits.--“_Experimental Observations_,” _Virchow’s Archiv._, Vol. XXIX.,
1864.


=Pasteur, Louis.= B. at Dole (Jura), 1822. Studied at Besançon; M.D.,
1847; Prof. Physics, Lyceum, Dijon, 1848; Prof. Strasburg, 1852; Dean
Fac. Sciences, Lille, 1854; Scien. Dir. Norm. Sch., Paris, 1857-1867;
Prof. Geol. Physics and Chem. École des Beaux Arts, 1863; Prof. Chem.
Sorbonne, 1867; Mem. Acad. Sci., 1862; Direct. Lab. of Chem. Research,
Fac. Sci., Paris; Med. (2) Roy. Soc. of Gt. Brit.; received Prize of
10,000 fls. from Austria, and another of 12,000 frs., and a State annuity
for his works on silk-worms, beer, wines and vinegar.

Author of “Nouvel exemple de fermentation déterminé par des animalcules
infusoires, pouvant vivre sans oxygène libre,” 1863; “Études sur le vin,
ses maladies, causes qui les provoquent, etc.,” 1866; “Études sur le
vinaigre, ses maladies, moyens de les prévenir, etc.,” 1868; “Études sur
la maladie des vers à soie,” 1870; “Études sur la bière,” 1878; “Les
Microbes,” 1878, jointly with M. Tyndall, etc. Contrib. paper on “The
attenuation of the virus of rabies,” Académie des Sciences, May 19, 1884.

“M. Vulpian injected under the skin of rabbits saliva collected at the
very moment of the experiment, from perfectly healthy individuals, and
this injection killed the rabbit so inoculated in forty-eight hours.
The blood of these rabbits was found to be filled with microscopic
organisms; among which was a special organism discovered by M. Pasteur in
the course of his experiments with inoculation of the saliva of a child
who had died of rabies. One drop of this blood, diluted in ten grammes
of distilled water, and injected under the skin of other rabbits, also
brought on the death of these animals; the blood of which was similarly
filled with microscopic organisms. These singular results, of which the
interpretation is by no means easy, present also the no less singular
peculiarity of not being stable. Rabbits placed in identical conditions,
and inoculated with the same saliva, experienced no ill effects from
their inoculation, and continued in excellent health. It would therefore
appear that experimental microbiology is not yet on the way to become
either an easy or clear science, notwithstanding M. Pasteur’s _fiat
lux_.”--_Brit. Med. Journ._, April 9, 1881, p. 571.

“The question of spontaneous generation I will not attempt to treat here
as it would require special discussion. The experiments of M. Pasteur
have only shown that under the experimental conditions with which he
surrounded himself, conditions which were far from natural, he did not
detect any spontaneous organisation of matter. Moreover, all those who
have devoted themselves to science, with the sole aim of seeking the
truth, as G. Bernard, Huxley, Häckel, etc., while admitting that M.
Pasteur’s experiments had been properly conducted within the very narrow
circle they occupied, have unanimously rejected the assertions and
generalisations drawn from them by that savant himself.”--Dr. Jousset de
Bellesme, _Progrès Médical_, Vol. X., 1882, p. 340.

“It is now four years since the study of rabies was first commenced in my
laboratory, and it has been continued without any other interruption than
the enforced cessations which depend on the conditions of the enquiry,
conditions which are very unfavourable. The incubation of the disease is
always of long duration. There are never sufficient facilities to enable
one at a given moment to multiply experiments. In spite of these material
hindrances, which however the French Government, in its care for the
great scientific interests involved, has done everything in its power to
remove, the experiments which we, my fellow-workers and I, have carried
out, have nevertheless passed beyond the possibility of numbering them.…
If you take any street-dog you please and inoculate rabies in this manner
by trephining, using as inoculating-material a portion of the bulb of an
animal which has died of the disease, you will invariably convey rabies.
The dogs to which the disease has been communicated in this manner are to
be counted by hundreds. The method has never failed. The same operation
has been performed on hundreds of guinea-pigs and on a yet greater number
of rabbits, without a single failure.”--_Pasteur’s_ “_Address Delivered
at the International Med. Congress at Copenhagen_,” Aug. 11th, “_Med.
Times and Gazette_,” Aug. 23rd, 1884.

“In the case where rabies is produced by a bite, or by hypodermic
injection, interference with the length of the incubation period must be
chiefly ascribed to the great variation which is possible in the amount,
always indefinite, of inoculated poison which reaches the central nervous
system. If then we wish to determine the intensity of the virus from the
length of the incubation period, it is unavoidably necessary to have
recourse to inoculation by trephining, which is absolutely certain in its
effects, and to employ larger quantities than such as would be necessary
simply to produce rabies. When we operate in this way, irregularities
in the length of incubation with the same virus will show a tendency to
entirely disappear, because we always obtain the maximum of effect which
the virus can produce; that maximum corresponding to the minimum duration
of incubation. Thus we have at length obtained a method which has
enabled us to enquire into the possible existence of varying degrees of
virulence, and to mutually compare them. The only secrets in this method,
I repeat, are to inoculate by trephining, and to use a quantity of virus,
which, although very weak, is more than sufficient to produce rabies in
and by itself.”--_Ibid._

“As he says substantially in his published report on the subject of
canine madness, which he read before a meeting of the Academy of Sciences
on May 19, the first experiments he has made give him almost certain hope
of success. But, notwithstanding his sanguine views as to the finally
favourable results of his investigations, and their unqualified benefit
to mankind, he has to ‘multiply the proofs _ad infinitum_ on different
species of the brute creation.’ When this shall have been done he will
then try the remedy on man.”--_Report of a Conversation with M. Pasteur_,
“_Daily Telegraph_,” June 6, 1884.


=Pavy, Frederick Wm.=, 36, Grosvenor Street, W. M.D. Lond., 1853;
F.R.C.P. Lond., 1860; F.R.S.; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path.
Soc.; Corr. Mem. Soc. Anat. Paris, and Med. Chir. Soc. Edin.; Mem.
(formerly Vice-Pres.) Paris Med. Soc.; Fell. Med. Soc. Lond.; Phys. and
Lect. on Med. (formerly Lect. on Physiol. and on Comp. Anat.) Guy’s
Hosp.; Goulston Lect. R.C.P. Lond., 1862 and 1863; Croonian Lect., 1878;
Lettsom Lect. on Physiol. Med. Soc., 1859.

Author of “Researches on Sugar Formation in the Liver,” Philos. Trans.,
1861; “Immunity of Stomach from being Digested by its own Secretion
during Life,” Ibid., 1863; “Remarks on Physiological Effects of Strychnia
and the Woorali Poison,” Guy’s Hosp. Reps., 1856; “Lesion of the Nervous
System producing Diabetes,” Ibid., 1859; “Lettsom Lectures on certain
points connected with Diabetes,” “Lancet,” 1860; etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Guy’s Hospital Museum Theatre and
Lecture Room in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of
Lectures in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. No experiments returned in 1878._

“Has always illustrated his lectures by experiments (2108); but believes
he was the first physiological lecturer in London who did so (2033).…
For purposes of experiment uses dogs, rabbits, guinea-pigs, and frogs
(2089-90); which are bought in the ordinary way at Leadenhall Market
(2101-4); during the season about 20 dogs and 10 rabbits are used
(2096).”--_Digest Ev. Roy. Com._, p. 19.

“Through an opening in the stomach of a dog, Bernard introduced, while
digestion was going on, the hind legs of a living frog. The legs were
dissolved away, the animal continuing all the while alive.… I have
repeated this experiment myself, and obtained a similar result.”… “I
performed an experiment, substituting the ear of a rabbit for the legs
of a frog.…. At the end of two hours the ear was withdrawn, and several
spots of erosion were observed on its surface, but nowhere was it eaten
through. On being replaced for another two-and-a-half hours, the tip
to the extent of about half or three-quarters of an inch was almost
completely removed, a small remnant of it only being left attached by a
narrow shred to the remainder of the ear.”--_Lancet_, No. 2,070.


=Pawlow, S.=, St. Petersburg.

Author of “Folgen der Unterbindung des Pancreasganges bei Kaninchen;”
“Zur Lehre ueber die Innervation der Blutbahn,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol.
XX., p. 210, etc.

Made experiments in the Physiological Laboratory at Breslau; also in the
Laboratory of Prof. Ustimowitsch at St. Petersburg.

“The _Journal of Anat. and Physiol._ for May, 1869, contains a short
communication by Prof. Rutherford relating to the action of the
section of the vagus on the blood pressure. According to Rutherford’s
experiments the results of section of the vagus depend upon the condition
of the alimentary canal; when the canal is full, the section of the
nerves occasions heightened pressure, whereas in starving animals
this operation causes no alteration in the blood pressure. Rutherford
thinks this phenomenon is caused by the depressory distention of the
intestinal vessels by the food contained in them. He supposes that the
sensory nerves ending in the vagus root are stimulated by the food. The
division of these ducts occasions a reflex narrowing of the vessels and
hence heightened pressure. This important hypothesis of Rutherford’s
(neither the amount nor the duration of blood pressure has been given,
nor the time of feeding, etc.), has, as far as we know, not been tested
experimentally, although the fact is often brought forward. This was the
chief incentive which prompted me to make the following experiments:--All
the experiments (twenty in all) were made exclusively on dogs, the
directions given by Rutherford being carefully followed. The animals were
immediately placed under the effects of curare.… The nervus vagi were cut
through one after the other … other sensory nerves (mostly the Nervus
dorsalis pedis) were cut.… The results of the experiments made by me in
this manner were, excepting in two cases, diametrically opposed to the
results described by Rutherford.”--_Zur Lehre ueber die Innervation der
Blutbahn_, Pflüger’s _Archiv._, Vol. XX., p. 210.


=Pekelharing, C. A.= Prof. of Physiol., Utrecht Veterinary School,
formerly Prof. at Leyden Univ.

Author of “Ueber die Harnstoffbestimmung,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol. II., p.
602; “Beitrag zur Kenntniss des Peptons,” Ibid., Vol. XXII., p. 185.


=Pellacani Paolo.= Prof. of Physiol. Univ. of Turin; formerly Prof. Univ.
Libera, Ferrara, and Modena.

Author of “De l’action physiologique de quelques substances sur les
muscles de la vessie des animaux et de l’homme,” Archives Ital. de Biol.,
Vol II., 1882.

Made experiments in the Pharm. Lab., Strasburg, also at Physiol. Lab.,
Turin, on the exposed bladders of dogs. The bladders were _sometimes_
“left in the abdominal cavity.”--_Arch. Ital._, Vol. II., p. 303. Also
experimented on the effects of curare and strychnine.


=Perroncito= (Prof.), Turin. Scuola Veterinaria.

Made experiments with the virus of anthrax on sheep and oxen.


=Peyrani= (Prof.), Parma University.


=Pflüger, Emil.= B. at Hanau, 1829. Prof. of Physiol. Med. Fac. Bonn
University, Geheim. Med. Rath.

Author of “Beiträge zur Lehre der Respiration” in “Archiv für die
gesammte Physiologie, 1875;” Editor of “Archiv für die gesammte
Physiologie des Menschen und des Thiers,” Bonn, 1868, etc.


=Picard, P.=, Lyons. Prof. of Physiol. Med. Faculty.

Made experiments on the action of morphine in dogs.--_Gaz. Med. de
Paris_, No. 12, p. 143.


=Pierret= (Mons.), Lyons. Prof. of Path. Anat. Med. Faculty.


=Pitres, A.=, Paris.

Author (jointly with M. F. Franck) of “Recherches graphiques sur les
mouvements simples et sur les convulsions provoquées par les excitations
du cerveau,” Travaux du lab. de M. Marey, 1878-79, p. 413.

Dogs trepanned, the brain stimulated, muscles of the paw dissected out,
eyelids hooked back to study the change of the diameter of the pupil
during electric stimulation of the brain.


=Platt, W. B.=, Baltimore. M.D. (Harvard), M.R.C.S. (Eng.).

Made experiments on the action of Resorcin on dogs, rabbits, and frogs.

“Exp. 3.--A black and tan male dog, weight 4,675 grammes, injected at
5.08 p.m. April 10th, 1882, with 1·5 grammes dissolved in distilled
water.… This is injected in 5 places beneath skin of abdomen.… Up to 5.24
very restless.… 5.29. Same, seems very unhappy, tremor of hind legs.
5.30. Back arched as he moves about; holds up left fore-paw high in
the air, quivering.… 5.44. Staggers, tumbles, steps about constantly.…
11th--Dog of yesterday seen at 3.20 p.m.… Drags hind legs after him, as
if paraplegic, with much difficulty manages to stand. A viscid saliva
drops from mouth.…. 3.40. Froths copiously at mouth; lies down as if
to sleep.… 6.14. Gasps, barks, foams at mouth, eyes glare, jaws snap.…
6.36. Struggles further, a violent spasm, head drawn back at right
angles to body, intermittent jerking of limbs.… 7.22. Dog appears almost
normal, with slightly rapid respiration. Still does notice noises or
objects; greatly exhausted; animal _now left_.” “12th.--At 6 a.m. animal
found dead after at least 26 hours.”--“_Observations on the Action of
Resorcin_,” _Amer. Journ. of Med. Sci._, Jan., 1883, p. 100.


=Piso-Borme= (Prof.), Cagliari University.


=Popoff, Leo.= Phys. and Prof. Univ. St. Petersburg.

Author of “Ueber die naturliche pathologische Injection der Gallengänge
und einige andere, nach der Unterbindung des Ductes choledochus bei
Thieren beobachtete pathologische Erscheinungen,” Virchow’s Archiv, Vol.
LXXXI. (1880), p. 524; “Ueber die Folgen der Unterbindung der Ureteren
und der Nierenarterien bei Thieren, im Zusammenhang mit einigen anderen
pathologischen Prozessen,” Ibid., Vol. LXXXII., p. 40.

Made experiments on rabbits and dogs.


=Pouchet, Félix Archimède.= Born at Rouen, 1800. Died at Rouen, 1872.
M.D. Paris, 1827; Prof. Nat. Hist. Museum of Rouen; Prof. Med. Sch.
Rouen, 1838; Member of several Learned Socs.

Author of “Histoire naturelle de la famille des Solanées,” Rouen,
1829; “Zoologie classique, ou Histoire naturelle du règne animal,”
1841; “Recherches sur l’anatomie et la physiologie des mollusques,”
1842; “Théorie positive de l’ovulation spontanée, et de la fécondation
des mammiferès et de l’espèce humaine, basée sur l’observation de
toute la série animale,” 1847; “Monographie des genre hérite,” 1847;
“Traité élémentaire de Botanique appliquée,” 1835; “Recherches sur les
organes de la circulation, de la digestion, et de la respiration des
animaux infusoires,” 1849; “Histoire naturelle et agricole du hanneton
et de sa larve,” Rouen, 1853; “Histoire des Sciences naturelles an
Moyen-Age,” 1853; “Hétérogénie, on Traité de la génération spontanée,”
1859; “Recherches et expériences sur les animaux ressuscitants,” 1859;
“Nouvelles expériences sur la génération spontanée et la résistance
vitale,” 1863; “L’Univers, les infiniment grands et les infiniments
petits,” 1865.


=Pouchet, Henri Ch. Georges=, Paris. (Son of the preceding.) B. at Rouen,
1833. M.D. Paris, 1864; Replaced Paul Bert at the Sorbonne in 1875; Prof.
Comp. Anat. Museum Nat. Hist., 1879; Prof. of Biological Chemistry,
Medical Faculty.

Author of “De la Pluralité des Races Humaines,” 1858; “Histologie
Humaine,” 1863, etc., etc.

Made experiments on the extirpation of the spleen in animals, fishes, and
pigeons; also with electricity on fishes.


=Power, D’Arcy=, 27, Gt. Cumberland Place, Hyde Park, W. B.A. Oxon.
(Exhib. in Nat. Sci. Exeter Coll., 1st class in Nat. Sci.), 1878; M.A.,
1881; M.B., 1882; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1882; (Oxon., St. Bartholomew, Vienna,
and Dub.); House Surg. (late Ophth. House Surg.) St. Barthol. Hosp.;
Asst. Demonst. of Physiol. St. Barthol. Hosp. Med. Sch., 1878-81.

Author of various articles in Quart. Micros. Journ., St. Barthol. Hosp.
Reps. &c.; joint author (with Dr. V. D. Harris) of “Handbook for the
Physiological Laboratory,” 1882.


=Power, Henry=, 37A, Great Cumberland Place, W. M.B. Lond. (Univ. Med.
Schol. in Surg. and Comp. Anat.), 1855: F.R.C.S. Eng., 1854; M., 1851
(St. Barthol.); Exhib. in Anat. and Physiol. Univ. Lond., 1852; Fell.
Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Mem. Path. Soc.; Mem. Counc. (late Arris and Gale
Lect. on Anat. and Physiol.) R.C.S. Eng.; Sen. Opth. Surg. and Lect. on
Opth. Surg. St. Barthol. Hosp.; Cons. Opth. Surg. St. Barthol. Hosp.,
Chatham; Exam. in Anat. and Phys. R.C.S. Eng.

Editor of 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th edit. of Dr. Carpenter’s “Principles
of Human Physiology,” 1864-69-76; “Illustrations of the Principle
Diseases of the Eye,” 1869; Transl. of “Stricker’s Manual of Human and
Comparative Histology,” New Syd. Soc. 1870; and of “Erb on the Diseases
of the Nervous System,” Ziemssen’s Cyclop.; Editor (with Dr. Sedgwick) of
“Mayne’s Expository Lexicon.”

Made experiments with Dr. Lauder Brunton on the diuretic action of
Digitalis.


=Preyer, Thierry William=, Jena University. Born at Manchester, 1841;
M.D. 1866 (Univs. Bonn, Berlin, Heidelberg, Vienna, and Paris); Prof.
Physiol. Jena, 1869, and Direct. of the Physiol. Instit.

Author of “Die Blausauere,” Bonn, 1868-70, “Reise nach Island im Sommer,”
1860; “Ueber die Aufgabe der Naturwissenschaft,” Jena, 1866; “Die
Empfindungen,” Berlin, 1867; “Der Kampf um das Dasein,” Bonn, 1868; “Die
Blutkrystalle,” Jena, 1871; “Ueber die Ursache des Schlafs,” Stuttgart,
1877; “Ueber die Grenzen der Tonwahrnehmung,” Jena, 1876; “Elemente der
reinen Empfindungslehre,” Jena, 1877; “Die Kataplexie und der thierische
hypnotismus,” Jena, 1878; “Akustische Untersuchungen,” Jena, 1879.


=Priestley, John.= Asst. Lect. in Physiol. Owen’s Coll., Manchester.

Author of “An Account of the Anatomy and Physiology of Batrachian
Lymph-Hearts,” “Journ. of Physiol.,” Vol. I., No. 1, p. 1.

Made experiments in the Physiological Laboratory of Owen’s College,
Manchester; also jointly with Prof. A. Gamgee, on dogs, rabbits, and
frogs.


=Prudden, T. Mitchell.= M.D. Direct. of the Physiol. and Pathol. Lab. of
the Alumni Association of the Coll. Phys. and Surg., New York; Lect. on
Normal Hist. in Yale Med. Coll. Pathol. to the Manhattan Eye and Ear Hosp.

Author of “Action of Salicylic Acid upon Blood Cells,” Amer. Journ. of
Med. Sci. 1882, p. 64; “Rhabdomyoma of the Parotid Gland,” Ibid., 1883, p.
438; “Experimental Studies on the Transplantation of cartilage,” Ibid.,
1881, p. 360.

“Action (of Salicylic Acid) on the Circulation and Emigration.--This
was studied in the bladder and mesentery of the living curarized frog,
Thorm’s frog-plate being used as in the former experiments.”--_Amer.
Journ. of Med. Sci._, 1882, p. 67.


=Puglia, Guiseppe.= Prof. Classe Zoojatrice, Modena.


=Pugliatti, Guiseppe.= Prof. Messina University.


=Purser, John Mallet=, 3, Wilton Terrace, Dublin. M.D.T.C.D., 1874; M.B.,
1863; F.R.Q.C.P. Irel., 1876; L. and L.M., 1865; L.R.C.S.T., 1863; L.M.
Rot. Hosp. Dub., 1863; (Univ. Dub. and Carm. Sch.); Mem. Path.; Soc.
Dub., and Med. Soc. Coll. Phys.; Prof. of Insts. of Med. Sch. of Physic.
T.C. Dub.; Lect. on Physiol. Carm. Sch. of Med.

Contrib. papers to various journals.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Laboratory Medical College, Dr.
Steeven’s Hospital, Dublin, Physiological Laboratory, Carmichael School
of Medicine, and 212, Great Brunswick Street, Dublin, in 1878 and
1879; also in 1888, at Physiological Workroom, 3, Wilton Terrace. No
Experiments returned in 1878 and 1879._

“Considers that experiments on live animals are necessary for
demonstration, the greater number would be under anæsthetics (4793-99A),
but some painful ones on the sensitive nerves of warm-blooded animals are
desirable (4793-99A).”--_Digest Ev. Roy. Com._, London, 1876, p. 35.


=Putnam, James J.= M.D. Boston, United States.

Author of “Contribution to the Physiology of the Cortex Cerebri,” “Boston
Surgical and Med. Journ.,” 1874, No. 16.


=Pütz, H.= Prof. Extraord. Halle Univ.

Injected human tuberculous matter into horses. Results negative. Also fed
a calf on 3½ lbs. of tuberculous human lung, and kept it alive 170 days.
Results equally negative. Tuberculous matter injected into the lungs and
abdomen of calves.--_Deutsche Med. Wochenschrift_, 1882, No. 48, p. 652.


=Putzeys, Felix.= M.D. Liège.

Joint author (with Aug. Swan) of “Ueber die physiologische Wirkung des
Schefelsauren Guanidins,” Pflüger’s Archiv, Vol. XII., p. 597.

Experiments on frogs with guanidin. Spinal narrow cut, nervus ischiadicus
cut and stimulated, then guanidin injected. Frogs hung up by a string
through the chin and hind members dipped into guanidin. Heart exposed,
nervus vagus cut, and guanidin injected.


=Pye, Walter=, 4, Sackville Street, Piccadilly, W., and Thatched House
Club, St. James’s Street, S.W. F.R.C.S. Eng., 1878; M. 1876 (St.
Barthol.); Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc. and Med. Soc. Lond.; Mem. Harv. and
Ophth. Socs.; Lect. on Physiol. St. Mary’s Hosp. Med. Sch.; Asst. Surg.
Victoria Hosp. for Children; Anat. Asst. Mus. R.C.S. Eng., House Surg.
and House Phys. St. Barthol. Hosp.; Lect. on Physiol. St. Mary’s Hosp.
Med. Sch.

Contrib. to Philos. Trans., Practitioner, 1877, and other Med. Journs.

_Held a License for Vivisection at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital Medical
School, 1878 and 1879. Certificate for Experiments without Anæsthetics
conjointly with Dr. Lauder Brunton in 1879. This Certificate not acted
upon. No experiments returned in 1878._


=Pye-Smith, Philip Henry=, 54, Harley Street, Cavendish Square, W. B.A.
Lond. (Hon.) 1858; M.D. (Gold Medal), 1864; M.B. (Hon.) 1863; F.R.C.P.
Lond., 1870; M. 1865 (Guy’s and Continental Schools); Exam. in Physiol.
Univ. Lond.; Sen. Asst. Phys. and Lect. on Physiology Guy’s Hosp.;
Secretary of the Association for the Advancement of Medicine by Research.

Author of “Address to the Department of Anatomy and Physiology,” Brit.
Ass., 1879; Report (with Dr. Brunton) on “Intestinal Secretion,” etc.,
etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Guy’s Hospital Museum Theatre and
Lecture Room in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of
Lectures in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates Dispensing with obligation
to kill in 1878-79-80-82-83. Certificates for Experiments on Cats, Dogs,
Horses, Mules, or Asses, in 1878. No experiments on Horses, Mules, or
Asses returned._

“Considers that the study of Physiology in its full sense is impossible
without vivisection.”--_Digest Ev. Roy. Com._, p. 19.


=Quincke, H.= B. 1834, at Frankfort-on-the-Oder. Prof. Wurzburg, 1878;
afterwards Med. Councillor, Direct. of Clinic. at Kiel.

Author of “Beiträge zur Lehre vom Icterus,” Virchow’s Archiv, 1884, Vol.
V., Book i., p. 125.

Made experiments on dogs, rabbits, mice, and pigeons.


=Radcliffe, Chas. Bland=, 25, Cavendish Square, W. M.D. Lond., 1861;
M.B., 1845; F.R.C.P. Lond., 1858; L., 1848; Goulston Lect. 1860; Croon.
Lect. 1873; Censor. 1875-76; Fell. Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; Cons. Phys.
Westm. Hosp.

Author of “Proteus, or the Law of Nature;” “On Epilepsy, Pain, Paralysis,
and certain other Disorders of the Nervous System,” 1883; etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College London, 1878.
Certificate Dispensing with obligation to kill, 1878._


=Rambaud= (Prof.), Rue de l’Hôtel-de-Ville, 77, Lyons. Prof. of Medicine
Med. Faculty.


=Ranvier, L.=, Boulevard Saint Michel, 105, Paris. Prof. of Anatomy Med.
Fac., College of France.

Author of “Recherches sur les éléments du sang,” Travaux du Laboratoire
d’histologie, 1875; “Leçons d’anatomie générale,” Paris, 1880.


=Ravaglia, Giuseppe= (Prof.), Bologna University.


=Raynaud, Maurice.= B. 1834; d. 1881; late Phys. at La Charité, Paris;
Agrégé of the Fac. of Med.; Mem. of Section of Med. Path. Acad. of Med.;
and Officer of the Legion of Honour.

Author of “De la transmissibilité de la rage de l’homme au lapin,” Compt.
Rend., Vol. LXXXIX. (1879), p. 714.

“M. Raynaud has communicated the results of experimental researches he
has made with M. Lannelongue on the transmission of rabies from man to
rabbits.… In a second series of experiments, inoculations have been made
with different liquids extracted from the tissues of the dead body.…
Finally, inoculations were made from rabbit to rabbit under the most
varied conditions; with the salivary glands, and the lymphatic ganglions;
death was the result. It remains to be seen whether the disease thus
communicated was really hydrophobia. MM. Colin, Dejardin-Baumetz, and
Pasteur think it was not. M. Raynaud, himself, only asserts the fact
weakly, as he draws attention to the absence of the period of excitement,
the short time of incubation, the extreme rapidity with which death
ensues; lastly, he mentions cases where inoculated animals have recovered
after a few days’ illness.… M. Gosselin thinks the surest method of
recognizing the disease would be by retransmission from the rabbit to the
dog.”--_Archives générales de Médecine_, Vol. I. (1881), p. 369.


=Redfern, Peter=, 4, Lower Orescent, Belfast, and Templepatrick House,
Donaghdee. M.B. Lond., 1844; M.D., 1847; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1843; F. (exam.)
1851; L.S.A., 1844; Corr. Mem. Soc. de Biol. Paris; Hon. Mem. Acad. Roy.
de Méd. de Belgique; Prof. of Anat. and Physiol. Qu. Coll. Belfast; Mem.
Senate and Exam. in Anat. and Physiol. Qu. Univ. Irel.; Exam. Anat. Univ.
Ireland; Lect. on Anat. and Physiol. and Exam. King’s Coll. Aberdeen.

Author of “Abnormal Nutrition in Articular Cartilages, with Experimental
Researches on the Lower Animals,” 1850, etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Queen’s College Belfast Physiological
Laboratory in 1879-80-81-82-83. No experiments returned in 1882 and 1883._


=Régnault, Henri Victor.= B. at Aix-la-Chapelle, 1810; D. 1878. Studied
at the École Polytechnique; Engineer-in-Chief of Mines, 1847; Director
of the Porcelain Manufactory of Sèvres, 1854; Prof. of Physics, Collége
de France, and of Chemistry at the École Polytechnique, 1840; Member of
French Acad., 1840.

Author of “Cours élémentaire de Chimie.”


=Regnard, Paul=, Boulevard St. Michel, 46, Paris. Prof. of Physiol. La
Sorbonne.

Inventor (with Félix Jolyet) of a machine to study the modifications of
the products of respiration.--_Gaz. Med. de Paris_ (1877), p. 190-199.


=Reichert, C. B.= Prof. of Theoretical Hist. and Anat. Med. Fac. Univ.
Berlin.

Co-editor (with Du Bois-Reymond) of “Archiv. für Anatomie und
Physiologie.”


=Rémy, Charles=, Avenue Victoria, 18, Paris. M.D. Paris, 1878. Phys. La
Charité, formerly prosector of Med. Sch., Reims; Mem. Société Anatomique.

Author of “Développement des tissus cartilagineux et osseux,” Paris, 1880.


=Retzius, G.= Prof. of Med. at Stockholm.

Made experiments with chromacid, chromacid ammonia, etc., on the retina
of various animals--toads, hens, rabbits, oxen.


=Reymond.= (See Du Bois Reymond.)


=Richards, Vincent=, Goalundo, Bengal. F.R.C.S., Edin., 1882; M.R.C.S.,
Eng., 1863 (Guy’s); Mem. Asiat. Soc., Bengal; Civil Surg.; Superint.
Emigr., Calcutta Port; Surg. E.B.R.V.; Late Mem. Comm. for Investigat. of
Snake Poisoning.

Joint Author of “Report on Indian and Australian Snake Poisoning.”
Contrib. of “Cholera amongst Emigrants,” Ind. Med. Gaz., 1881,
“Experiments with Permanganate of Potash in Cobra Poisoning.”--_Ibid._,
1882, etc.

Has made experiments on pigs with cholera virus.--_Lancet_, May 3rd,
1884, p. 814.


=Richet, L. Alfred=, Laboratory of the Hôtel Dieu, Paris. M.D., 1844;
Res. Surg. Hosp. St. Louis, 1858; La Pitié, 1863; Hôtel Dieu, 1872; Prof.
Clin. Surg. Medical Faculty; Mem. Acad. of Med. 1865.

Author of “Traité pratique d’Anatomie Médico chirurgicale” 1850 and 1873;
Contrib. of numerous Articles to “Archives Générales de Médicine;” also
“Le Roi des Animaux,” “Revue des Deux Mondes, Tom. 55.”

M. Richet has found that strong and repeated electrical stimulation, will
cause, in rabbits and dogs, a tetanus comparable in its results to the
traumatic form.

“In the dogs the electricity employed was not sufficiently powerful to
arrest respiration, and death was due to the elevation of temperature.
The ascent of the thermometer was extremely rapid, so that after the
tetanus had lasted for half-an-hour, the lethal temperature of 111 or 112
F. was reached.… The proof that the increased body heat was the cause
of death was furnished by the fact that if the animal is kept cool by
artificial means it may bear for more than two hours extremely strong
currents, which cause severe tetanus without dying for some days. The
capacity for generating this great temperature under electrisation does
not disappear even after prolonged application, and it is not influenced
by previous fasting for two or three days.… Usually death occurs when
a temperature of 112° is attained, but in some cases it reached 112·5
and even 113·3. If the temperature did not rise above 110° death did
not ensue on the same or the following day; after this point however,
although death may not be immediate, it occurs within 24 hours.… At 111°
the breathing is so frequent that it is hardly possible to count it and
so feeble that scarcely any air enters the thorax.”--_Lancet_, September
17th, 1881, p. 515.


=Richet, Charles=, Rue Bonaparte, 5, Paris. B. at Paris 1850. M.D.,
Paris, 1877.

Author of “Recherches expérimentelles et cliniques sur la sensibilité,”
Paris, 1877.

Made experiments on fishes reported to the Acad. de Sciences, Oct. 24,
1881.

“Pain is a purely central phenomenon. It is a sensation that may exist,
even to intensity, without manifesting its presence by any external sign,
and consequently it is impossible to gauge it. All physiologists know
that during vivisection there is an entire dissimilarity in the manner
in which animals seem to suffer. Some remain motionless, the eyes fixed,
neither struggling nor moaning; they appear as if struck by stupor.
Others on the contrary groan and howl, never remaining a moment without
struggling or endeavouring to escape. Every incision that is made, every
laceration, every pull is instantly followed by a shock which interferes
with the result of the experiment.… I will point out, moreover, the fact
observed by the physiologists at Alport. The blood of the animals used
for operations is almost devoid of fibrine, like the blood of animals
that have been overworked. As regards dyspepsia and disorders of the
digestive functions which prolonged pain brings on, the phenomenon is
rather psychical than physiological, and pain acts similarly to grief
and privation.”--“_Recherches expérimentelles et cliniques sur la
sensibilité_,” _Collection de Thèses École de Médicine_, Paris, 1877, p.
255.

“When it is a question of scientific research one must act resolutely,
without considering the pain.”--Revue des deux Mondes, Feb. 15, 1883.

“I do not believe that a single experimenter says to himself when he
gives curari to a rabbit, or cuts the spinal marrow of a dog, or poisons
a frog: ‘Here is an experiment which will relieve or will cure the
disease of some men.’ No, in truth, he does not think of that! He says to
himself ‘I shall clear up an obscure point, I will seek out a new fact.’
And this scientific curiosity which alone animates him, is explained by
the high idea he has formed of Science. This is why we pass our days
in fœtid laboratories (_dans les salles nauséabondes_), surrounded by
groaning creatures, in the midst of blood and suffering, bent over
palpitating entrails.”--_Ibid._

“Science has nothing to do with utility, or rather the true utilitarians
are those who have hope in the science of the future.”--_Ibid._


=Ringer, Sydney=, 15, Cavendish Place, W., M.D. Lond., 1863; M.B., 1860;
F.R.C.P. Lond., 1870, M. 1863; M.R.C.S. Eng. and L.S.A. 1859 (Univ.
Coll.); Prof. of Med. Univ. Coll.; Phys. and Prof. of Clin. Med. (late
Res. Med. Off.) Univ. Coll. Hosp.; late Asst. Phys. Childr. Hosp. Great
Ormond Street and Clin. Asst. Consump. Hosp. Brompton.

Author of “Ringer’s Handbook of Therapeutics,” 10th Edit., London, 1883;
“On the Temperature of the Body,” &c., London, 1883.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College London
Physiological Theatre in 1878 and 1879._

“In addition to these experiments, we have made some observations
clinically. To eighteen adults--fourteen men and four women--we ordered
ten grains of the pure nitrite of sodium in an ounce of water, and of
these seventeen declared that they were unable to take it. They came
back, protesting loudly, and required no questioning as to the symptoms
produced. They seemed to be pretty unanimous on one point--that it was
about the worst medicine (!) they had ever taken. They said if they ever
took another dose they would expect to drop down dead, and it would serve
them right. One man, a burly, strong fellow, suffering a little from
rheumatism only, said that after taking the first dose he ‘felt giddy,’
as if he would ‘go off insensible.’ His lips, face, and hands turned
blue, and he had to lie down for an hour and a half before he dared move.
His heart fluttered, and he suffered from throbbing pains in the head. He
was urged to take another dose, but declined on the ground that he had a
wife and family. Another patient had to sit down for an hour after the
dose, and said that it ‘took all his strength away.’ He, too, seemed to
think that the medicine did not agree with him.… The women appear to have
suffered more than the men! at all events, they expressed their opinions
more forcibly. One woman said that ten minutes after taking the first
dose--she did not try a second--she felt a trembling sensation all over
her, and suddenly fell on the floor. Whilst lying there she perspired
profusely, her face and head seemed swollen and throbbed violently, until
she thought they would burst.… Another woman said she thought she would
have died after taking a dose; it threw her into a violent perspiration,
and in less than five minutes her lips turned quite black and throbbed
for hours; it upset her so much that she was afraid she would never get
over it. The only one of the fourteen patients who made no complaint
after taking ten grains was powerfully affected by fifteen.… The effect
on these patients was so unpleasant that it was deemed unadvisable to
increase the dose.”--_Lancet_, Nov. 3, 1883.

“In addition to these observations on patients, I made six temperature
experiments on rabbits, but the results obtained were simply nil. I soon
found--a fact with which I was previously acquainted--that, in those
animals, fright exerts a marked influence on the temperature.”--_Handbook
of Therapeutics_, p. 516.

“Dr. Rickards and I gave to an habitual drunkard, making him ‘dead
drunk,’ twelve ounces of good brandy in a single dose, without the
slightest reduction of temperature.”

“In a boy aged ten, who had never in his life before taken alcohol in any
form, I found, through a large number of observations, a constant and
decided reduction of temperature.”--_Ibid._, pp. 340-1.


=Roberty, O.=, 4, Place de la Corderie, Marseilles. Prof. of Exper.
Physiol. School of Medicine.


=Robin, Ch. Phil.=, 94, Boulevard Saint Germain, Paris. M.D. Paris, 1846;
Prof. Histol. Med. Faculty Paris, 1862; Mem. Acad. Med., 1858; Mem.
Biol. Entomological Anatomical Socs. of Paris; Corr. Acad. Med. Chir.
Stockholm; Mem. Institute of France; Senator.

Author of “Fermentation” 1848; “Microscopical Anatomy;” 1868-69;
“Cellular Anatomy and Physiology,” 1873, and numerous other works;
“Journal de l’Anatomie et de la Physiologie normales et Pathologiques de
l’homme et des animaux” Paris, 1864-1880.


=Röhmann, F.= M.D.; Asst. at Physiol. Inst., Breslau.

Author of “Beobachtungen an Hunden mit Gallenfistel,” Pflüger’s Archiv.,
Vol. XXIX., p. 509.


=Rolleston, George=, M.D. Oxon., 1857; M.B., 1854; F.R.C.P. Lond. 1859,
M. 1856, (St. Barthol.); late F.R.S., F.L.S., F.Z.S.; Mem. Gen. Med.
Counc. Linacre Prof. of Anat.; Hon. Phys. Radcliffe Infirmary; late Lee’s
Reader in Anat., etc., etc.

Contrib. “The Brain of Man, and the Brains of Certain Animals,” “Medical
Times and Gazette,” 1862, etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Oxford Anatomical
Department of Museum in 1878._

“Vivisection is specially likely to tempt a man into certain
carelessness; the passive impressions produced by the sight of suffering
growing as is the law of our nature, weaker, while the habit of, and the
pleasure in experimenting grows stronger by repetition.”--Evid. Roy.
Com., Q. 1287.

“It is not so easy a thing to know when you have an animal thoroughly
anæsthetised; and what is more, some animals recover with much greater
rapidity than others of the same species from the same doses of
anæsthetics.”--_Ibid._, Q. 1349.


=Rollet= (Prof.), Gratz University.


=Rosenthal, Isidor=, B. 1836, Erlangen. M.D. Berlin Univ.; Prof. Physiol.
and Hygiene at Med. Fac. Univ. of Erlangen.

Author of “Athembewegungen u. Innervation derselben, thierische Wärme,”
in Hermann’s “Handbuch der Physiologie;” “Allgemeine Physiologie der
Muskeln u. Nerven,” in “Internationale Wissenschaftliche Bibliothek;”
“Bier u. Branntwein u. ihre Bedeutung für die Volksgesundheit,” 1881.


=Rossbach, Michael Joseph.= Prof. Med. Fac. Univ. Jena; Director of the
Clinic and Policlinic.

Author of “Pharmakologische Untersuchungen,” Wurzburg, 1876; “Ueber
den Einfluss der Künstlichen Respiration auf Strychnin-vergiftung,”
Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wiss., 1873, No. 24; “Neue Studien ueber den
Physiologischen Antagonismus der Gifte,” Pflüger, Vol. XXII., p. 1.

Experiments on curarised dogs and cats: Nerves dissected out and
stimulated, drugs injected. (_See_ Luchsinger.)

“At the same time Rossbach also studied the influence of artificial
respiration on the cramps induced by strychnine. He totally contradicts
the results observed by Leube. Artificial respiration, he finds, does not
alter the effects of poison, whether it be given in doses sufficient to
produce cramps only or in fatal doses.”--Eckhart’s _Beiträge_, Vol. X.
(1883), p. 40.


=Roth, Wladimir.= M.D.; ex-Chef de Clin. at Univ. of Moscow.

Made experiments with the Venom of Salamanders on frogs.--Rep. in _Gaz.
Med. de Paris_, 1877, p. 409.


=Roy, Charles Smart=, Cambridge. M.B. Edin. and C.M. 1875 (Univ. Edin.)
M.D. Edin. 1878, (Edin.) G. H. Lewes, Scholar; late Brown, Prof. of
Pathol. Univ., of London; Prof. of Pathol. Univ. of Cam., 1884; formerly
Asstn. to Prof. of Physiol. Univ. of Strasburg.

Contrib. to Journ. of Physiol., Du Bois Reymond’s Archiv. and Virchow’s
Archiv.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Cambridge University New Museum
Physiological Laboratory and at Brown Institution, London, in
1880-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures and for
Experiments on Cats, Dogs, Horses, Mules or Asses, in 1882. Special
Certificates for Experiments without anæsthetics and Certificate
permitting Experiments on Cats, Dogs, Horses, Mules or Asses in 1883. No
Experiments returned on Horses, Mules or Asses._

“Let me refer to what has been done by Dr. Roy in 1880, partly in
the Physiological Laboratory at Cambridge, and partly in the Leipsic
Philological Institute, the experiments being carried out on rabbits,
cats, and dogs. The animal was placed under curare, artificial
respiration was used, that is to say, a tube was pushed down the animal’s
windpipe, and worked by an engine in regular puffs in order to keep the
blood oxygenated. Then the back, skull, chest, and abdomen were opened.
I don’t suppose these were always opened in one animal, as in many cases
the animal would have died. No doubt sometimes part of the experiment
took place on one, and sometimes on another. The various organs were
dissected out. The principal nerves such as the sciatic nerve and so
on, were tied in two places and cut. This lasted for many hours. It is
stated the animal was under the influence of anæsthetics, but the use
of curare is admitted. In the most scientific opinion, when curare is
used, it neutralizes the use of the anæsthetic. I feel myself at a great
disadvantage in treating of these matters as compared with the gentlemen
beside me; but if I am making a mistake, I trust I may be corrected. In
this instance, however, I believe I am right. Curare creates paralysis,
it paralyses the muscles and prevents the animal resisting or showing the
symptoms by which alone the existence of anæsthesia can be tested.”--_Mr.
Reid’s Speech in House of Commons_, April 4th, 1883.

“It was first sought to obtain information upon this subject by
investigating the manner and extent to which the action of the heart
is affected by obstruction of the renal arteries and the other large
branches of the aorta; the facts obtained by taking this line of inquiry
were not however of a kind fitted to throw light upon the problem which
it was specially desired to solve. It soon became evident that an
investigation of the manner in which the renal secretion and circulation
are nominally regulated, and the relation which these bear to the
regulating mechanism of the systemic circulation, would be best fitted
to supply information of the kind required. The method employed, was to
record graphically the changes in volume of one or both kidneys, while
at the same time the changes in the blood-pressure in the aorta and the
rapidity with which the urine was secreted were also recorded on the same
revolving cylinder or, as continuous tracings, upon the paper of Ludwig’s
kymograph. The method used for recording the changes in volume of the
kidney is the same in principle as that of the plethysmograph. The kidney
is enclosed in a rigid metal box, the arrangement being such that while
the organ can freely expand or contract, and while the changes in volume
are recorded by a lever writing with a light glass pen upon the kymograph
paper, no obstruction is offered to the entrance and exit of blood by
the renal vessels nor to the outflow of urine by the ureter. The kidney
is surrounded by warm olive oil, which, however, is not in immediate
contact with its surface, but is separated from it by a delicate flexible
membrane of a kind which has already been referred to by the author in
several of his published papers, and which prevents any escape of the oil
by the side of the blood-vessels and other structures entering the hilus
of the gland.… When the instrument is in use, the kidney lies between
two delicate, exceedingly flexible membranes, which apply themselves
closely to its surface and to the surface of the structures entering the
hilus of the organ, and each of these membranes forms with each of the
symmetrical halves of the box a chamber which is filled with oil and
which communicates by a relatively wide flexible tube with the recording
instrument.”

Experiment “4. After the immediate effect of the operation has passed
off, the volume of the kidney will usually remain unchanged (with
exception of the changes due to the pulse and respiration) for many hours
unless some change in the conditions of the experiment be intentionally
introduced.

“5. When the _Traube-Hering_ curves of the blood-pressure present
themselves, the volume of the kidney does not expand with the rhythmic
rise in the blood-pressure. With each rise of the blood-pressure the
kidney _contracts_, expanding with each fall of the blood-pressure. The
renal vessels are, therefore, amongst those to the rhythmic contraction
and expansion of which the _Traube-Hering_ waves are due.

“6. Arrest for 3 or 4 minutes of the artificial respiration, where that
is employed, and where curare has been previously injected, causes a
contraction of the renal vessels (which may reach 12 per cent of the
post-mortem volume of the kidney) simultaneously with the rise of aortic
blood pressure which is produced by the asphyxia.

“7. Stimulation of the medulla oblongata by weak induced currents causes
a powerful contraction of the renal vessels.

“8. Stimulation of the central end of a sensory nerve, _e.g._, sciatic,
brachial plexus, splanchnic, &c., causes a contraction of the renal
vessels simultaneous with the rise in the aortic blood-pressure.
Stimulation of the central end of the vagus causes a contraction of the
kidney (where the vagus of the other side has been cut to eliminate
reflex inhibition of the heart), and the renal vessels _contract_ whether
the stimulation of the central end of the vagus cause a rise or a fall of
the aortic blood-pressure.

“9. Stimulation of nearly all the roots of the splanchnic in the thorax,
and of both larger and smaller splanchnic nerve-trunks causes contraction
of the kidney of the _opposite_ side. The extent to which the kidney
contracts on stimulation of the splanchnic is usually very considerable.
In one case the kidney contracted on stimulating with a strong induced
current for three minutes to an extent which was equal to 63 per cent. of
the post-mortem volume of the organ.

“10. In nearly every case stimulation of the peripheral end of the cut
splanchnic at the point where it passes through the diaphragm causes
contraction of _both_ kidneys; the kidney of the side opposite to the
nerve stimulated commencing to contract later than the one on the same
side as the stimulated nerve.

“11. Stimulation of the central end of a sensory nerve, or of the medulla
oblongata, or of the cervical spinal cord, causes a contraction of the
renal vessels after _both_ splanchnics have been cut at their point of
entrance into the abdominal cavity. Vaso-constrictor influences may
therefore pass from the spinal cord to the kidney by some other path than
the two splanchnics.

“12. Section of the splanchnic does not always cause an expansion of the
renal vessels, a fact which would make it doubtful whether a vascular
tonus of the renal vessels emanating from the vaso motor centre or
centres in the spinal cord is normally present.

“13. Stimulation of the _central_ ends of the majority of the fine nerves
which enter the kidney along with the vessels causes a contraction of the
vessels of the kidney.

“14. Stimulation of the _peripheral_ end of each and all of the renal
nerves which accompany the vessels causes a contraction of the organ.

“15. After section of all but one of the (usually from 7 to 11) nerves
accompanying the renal vessels, stimulation of the peripheral end of
the splanchnic or of a sensory nerve still causes a contraction of the
kidney which differs but little in amount from that produced by the same
stimulation when all the renal nerves were intact, but which takes
longer time to show itself after the stimulation.”--Extracts from paper
“_On the Mechanism of the Renal Secretion_,” by C. S. Roy, M.D.; read
before the Cambridge Philosophical Society, May 23, 1881.


=Russo, Antonio.= Prof. of Physiol. Med. Fac., Palermo University.


=Rutherford, William=, University, and 14, Douglas Crescent, Edinburgh.
M.D. Edin., 1863 (Thesis Gold Medallist); M.R.C.S. Eng.; (Univs. Edin.,
Berlin, Vienna, Paris); F.R.S.; Prof. of Insts. of Med. Univ. Edin.;
formerly Prof. of Physiol. King’s Coll. and Roy. Inst. Lond.; Annual
Pres. Roy. Med. Soc. Edin. and King’s Coll. Med. Soc.

Author of “Outlines of Practical Histology,” 1877; “A Text Book of
Physiology,” 1880; “Influence of the Vagus upon the Vascular System;”
Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin., 1870; “On the Physiological Action of Drugs
on the Secretion of Bile;” _Ibid._, 1879; “Lectures on Experimental
Physiology;” _Lancet_, 1871-72; etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Edinburgh, Physiological
Lecture Room and Laboratory in 1878-79-80-81-82-83; Certificates for
Illustrations of Lectures in 1878-79-80-82-83; also a Certificate for
Experiments without Anæsthetics; two Certificates dispensing with
obligation to kill; and two Certificates for Experiments on Cats, Dogs,
Horses, Mules, or Asses, in 1878; No Experiments on Horses, Mules, or
Asses._

“I will take one instance from certain experiments performed by Professor
Rutherford, and reported in the _British Medical Journal_. I refer to
the series of experiments commenced December the 14th, 1878. These
experiments were 31 in number; no doubt there were hundreds of dogs
sacrificed upon other series of experiments, but now I am only referring
to one set beginning as I say on the 14th of December, 1878. There were
in this set 31 experiments, but no doubt many more than 31 dogs were
sacrificed. All were performed on dogs, and the nature of them was this:
The dogs were starved for many hours. They were then fastened down; the
abdomen was cut open; the bile duct was dissected out and cut; a glass
tube was tied into the bile duct and brought outside the body. The duct
leading to the gall-bladder was then closed by a clamp and various drugs
was placed into the intestines at its upper part. The result of these
experiments was simply nothing at all--I mean it led to no increase of
knowledge whatever, and no one can be astonished at that, because these
wretched beasts were placed in such circumstances--their condition was
so abnormal--that the ordinary and universally recognised effect of
well-known drugs was not produced. These experiments were performed
without anæsthetics--the animals were experimented upon under the
influence of a drug called curari.”--_Mr. Reid’s Speech in the House of
Commons, April 4th, 1883._

“In your judgment and your own experience, are operations of that
description upon a dog to be taken as being evidence of what the effect
would be on the human being?--Certainly not, but merely as suggesting
what the action would be; that is all. The experiment must also be tried
upon man before a conclusion can be drawn.”--_Evid. Roy. Com._ Q. 2966.

“What is the rule by which you guide yourself in determining whether
animals shall be rendered insensible to pain or not?--When the mode of
rendering them insensible to pain would interfere with the due result
being obtained from the experiment, we do not so render them. Is that
any large proportion of the experiments?--I should say a considerable
proportion. Would it be more than half the experiments?--I should have
a difficulty in saying how many, but I should think about half the
experiments that I have done.”--_Ibid._, 2841-3.

“Where did you study physiology yourself?--I studied it in Berlin
chiefly. I had to go there to have a whole course of experiments
performed for my special benefit; there was a great expenditure of time
and teaching power, and also of animals, to teach me alone.”--_Ibid._, Q.
2867.


=Sanderson, John Burdon=, Physiol. Lab. Univ. Mus. Oxford, M.D. Edin.,
1851; F.R.C.P. Lond., 1863, M. (Exam.) 1855 (Edin.); LL.D., F.R.S.; Fell.
Roy. Med. Chir. Soc.; late Jodrell Prof. of Physiol., Univ. College;
Waynflete Prof. of Physiol., Oxford; late Phys. Consump. Hosp. Brompton;
Asst. Phys. and Lect. Middlesex Hosp.; Mem. Assoc. for Advancement of
Medicine by Research.

Author of Various Papers and Reports. Editor of “Handbook for the
Physiological Laboratory,” 1872.

_Held a License for Vivisection at the Brown Institution, and University
College, London; also unrestricted as to place in 1878-79-80-81-82-83.
Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures and for Experiments without
Anæsthetics in 1878 and 1882. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures
in 1879-80-81-83._

“For this purpose (to produce asphyxia) a cannula must be fixed air tight
in the trachea.… The phenomena as they present themselves in the dog,
may be enumerated as follows:--_First minute_--Excessive respiratory
movements.… Towards the close of the first minute the animal becomes
convulsed.… _Second minute_.… The iris is now dilated to a rim, the eye
does not close when the cornea is touched, nor does the pupil react
to light; all reflex action to stimuli has ceased.… _Third and fourth
minutes._--As death approaches, the thoracic and abdominal movements,
which are entirely inspiratory, become slower and slower as well as
shallower.… In these spasms which accompany the final gasps of an
asphyxiated animal, the head is thrown back, the trunk straightened or
arched backwards, and the limbs are extended, while the mouth gapes and
the nostrils dilate.”--_Handbook for the Physiological Laboratory_, p.
320.

“In a curarised rabbit, in which artificial respiration is maintained in
the usual way, an incision is made in the middle line, extending from
the upper third of the sternum to the upper end of the trachea. The
external jugular vein of one side is then brought into view, tied in two
places, and divided between ligatures.… Both ganglia having been thus
prepared with as little loss of time as possible, the sympathetic and
vagus nerves are divided, and the medulla oblongata (spinal cord) is then
divided.”--_Ibid._, p. 278.

“Fix the point of the chisel in the middle line of the skull (of a
rabbit) just behind the protuberance, and bore through the bone,
moving the handle of the instrument from side to side in order to
assist its passage, but not pressing with too great force. When the
skull has been penetrated, push the chisel downwards and forwards
through the cerebellum.… In half-an-hour or an hour afterwards test for
sugar.”--_Ibid._, p. 515.

“The bile in guinea-pigs is secreted in very large quantities.… When the
bile-duct is tied the guinea-pigs die in less than twenty-four hours; but
when it is not tied they will live for a week.”--_Ibid._, p. 505.


=Savory, Wm. Scovell=, 66, Brook Street, W. M.B. Lond. (Univ. Med.
Schl.), 1848; F.R.C.S. Eng. (Exam.) 1852; M. 1847; F.R.S.; Mem. Comt.
Exam. Roy. Coll. Surg. Eng.; Surg. and Lect. on Surg. St. Bath. Hosp.;
Exam. Surg. Univ. Coll.; Surg. Christ’s Hosp.; late Prof. Comp. Anat. and
Physiol. R.C.S. Eng.

Author of “Life and Death;” “Essays on Pyæmia, &c.;” St. Bart. Hosp.
Reps. and Various Essays in Philos. and Med. and Chir. Trans. and Med.
Journ.

Made experiments on dogs--to study the relative temperature of arterial
and venous blood.--_Lancet_, Vol. I., 1857, pp. 371-398.


=Schäfer, Edw. Albert=, University College, Gower Street, W.C. M.R.C.S.
Eng., 1874; (Univ. Coll.); F.R.S.; Jodrell Prof. of Physiol. Univ. Coll.;
formerly Fuller Prof. of Physiol. Roy. Inst.

Author of “A Course of Practical Histology,” London, 1883; Contrib. Proc.
Roy. Soc. and Journ. Anat. and Phys., &c. &c.; Editor of Microscopic Part
of Quain’s Anatomy, 8th Edition.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, London,
Physiological Theatre, Microscope Room with Ante Room, the Jodrell
Laboratory, Physiological Laboratory, and Curator’s Rooms in
1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures and
Dispensing with obligation to kill, 1878-79-80-81-82-83._

“Then may I take it there are a great number of experiments which,
supposing a frog to be a sensitive animal, must cause a vast deal of
pain, which are not done under chloroform?--There is no doubt of it. And
there is no precaution taken to diminish pain, if it suffers pain?--I
think I may say no special precaution.”--_Evid. Roy. Com._, Q. 3,801-2.


=Schiff, Moritz.= B. at Frankfort, O.M., 1823; Studied at Univs.
Heidelberg, Göttingen, and Berlin; Laureate in Med., Gott., 1844; Pupil
of Majendie and Longet; formerly Curator of Ornithological Museum,
Frankfort; Prof. of Ornith. and Path. Anat., Bern, 1855; Prof. Physiol.,
Florence, 1872; Prof. Physiol. at Geneva, 1876.

Author of “De vi motoria bascos encephali,” Frankfort, 1845;
“Untersuchungen zur Physiologie des Nervensystems,” 1854; “Nerven und
Muskel-Physiologie,” Lahr, 1838; “Ueber Zuckerbildung in der Leber,”
Wurzburg, 1859; “Sul sistema nervoso encefalico,” Florence, 1865; “Sur
la Physiologie de la Digestion,” Turin, 1867; “Sulla Misura della
Sensazione,” Florence, 1869; “De l’Inflammation et de la Circulation,”
Paris, 1873; “La pupille comme esthesiomètre,” Paris, 1875, etc.

“In Professor Schiff’s work, almost every lecture is accompanied by the
sacrifice of some animal; 700 a year, it is stated, thus perish (1343).
Calls attention to a discrepancy between two statements of Professor
Schiff: one stating that the dogs made no noise because they were not
in pain; the other stating that their nerves of vocalisation had been
cut “pour les empêcher.… de discréditer ainsi les études physiologiques
auprês des habitants du quartier” (1287).”--_Digest Ev. Roy. Com._, p. 11.

“A number of rabbits were deprived of food until they ate dead frogs
thrown into their hutch. The object of this experiment was to show that
herbivorous animals could live on animal food (See Schiff, _Physiologie
de la Digestive_, Vol. I., p. 67). What use this information may be put
to I leave to the judgment of unbiassed minds to determine. I know that
the rabbits suffered very much before they were induced to eat the dead
frogs.”--_Evid. Roy. Com._, Q. 4,888, p. 244.

“After the thousands of experiments made by these gentlemen, by which
they are enabled to contradict each other, and after all this fiendish
massacre, the latest writer on the nervous system, Moritz Schiff, a man
who has gained some notoriety as a vivisector, concludes, from numberless
other experiments he has made, that the functions of the cerebellum are
altogether unknown.”--_Fleming’s Essay_, p. 33.


=Schmidt, Albrecht.= Prof. Physiol. Med. Fac. Univ. Dorpat.


=Scott, John Alfred=, 25, Idrone Terrace, Blackrock, Co. Dublin.
L.K.Q.C.P. Irel. and L.M., 1882; L.R.C.S.I., 1881; L.M. Rot. Hosp., Dub.,
1880; (Ledw. and Carm. Schs. and Mercer’s and Adelaide Hosps., Dub.);
Fell. Acad. Med. Irel.; Mem. Photog. Soc. Irel.; Lect. on Anat. Physiol.
Carm. Coll. of Med. Dub.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Physiological Lecture Rooms and
Laboratory, Carmichael College, Dublin, in 1882 and 1883. Certificate
for Illustrations of Lectures in 1882 and 1883. No Experiments returned,
1882._


=Sedgwick, Wm. T.= Ph.B.; Fellow of the Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, U.S.A.

Contrib. “The influence of quinine upon the reflex excitability of the
spinal cord.”--“Journ. of Physiol.,” Vol. III., p. 22.

Experiments on frogs.


=Senator, Hermann=, 7, Bauhofstrasse, Berlin. B. Gnesen, 1834; M.D.,
Berlin, 1858; Pupil of Johannes Müller, 1875; Direct. Inner Dept. of
Augusta Hosp.; and Prof. extraord. Med. Faculty, Berlin.

Co-editor (with Prof. H. Kronecker) of “Centralblatt für die
medicinischen Wissenschaften.”


=Sertoli, Enrico=, Prof. Univ., Milan. Scuola Sup. di Veterinaria.


=Severini, Luigi=, Perugia. Prof. Università Libera, Corso di Zoojatrice.


=Sewall, Henry.= B. Sc.; Ph. D.; Prof. of Physiol. Univ. of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, U.S.A.; Assoc. in Biol. Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore.

Contrib. “Experiments upon the ears of fishes with reference to the
function of equilibrium.”--“_Journ. of Physiol._,” Vol. IV., p. 339, &c.

“The experiments to be described were carried on by means of the
facilities offered at the Marine Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins
University during the summer of 1881, at Beaufort, N.C., and again in
1883, on the Chesapeake Bay.… Records were made of experiments performed
upon more than ninety individuals (sharks and skate).… The experiments
… were performed under unusually favourable anatomical conditions, but
it must be confessed that the results obtained are far from forming a
solution of the problem investigated.”--_Journ. of Physiol._, Vol. IV.,
pp. 338, etc.


=Sharpey, William.= B. at Arbroath, Forfarshire, 1802; d. 1881. Studied
at Edinburgh and Paris; M.D. Edinburgh, 1823; LL.D. Edin.; F.R.C.S.
Edin., 1830; F.R.S., F.R.S.E.; a Trustee Hunt. Mus.; Mem. Gen. Med.
Counc.; Mem. Senate Univ. Lond.; Emerit. Prof. Anat. and Physiol. Univ.
of London, 1836; F.R.S., 1839.

“Has performed experiments on living animals, and sometimes exhibited
them (389-91), and considers such experiments absolutely necessary for
the progress of physiology (393), and that scientific investigation
by competent persons is important for the development of medical and
surgical improvement (398-401).”--_Digest. Ev. Roy. Com._, p. 4.

“The chief use of employing curari is to render the animal quite still;
that is the great purpose of it. What Mr. Hutton says is quite true, that
it is not generally recognised as an anæsthetic, and, therefore, not used
as an anæsthetic.--Then it is a contrivance to save to the operator the
trouble which the manifestation of pain by the animal might occasion him?
It facilitates the operation at any rate.”--_Evid. Roy. Com._, Q. 462-3.


=Sibson, Francis=, 59, Brook Street, W. M.D. Lond. 1848; M.D. Dub. (Hon.)
1867; F.R.C.P. Lond., 1853; Hon. D.C.L. Durh.; F.R.S.; Mem. Senate
(formerly Exam. in Med.) Univ. Lond.; Vice-Pres. (late Pres. Council)
Brit. Med. Assoc.; late Sen. Phys. and Lect. on Clin. Med. St. Mary’s
Hosp.; Goulst. Lect. R.C.P. Lond., 1853; Croon. Lect., 1870.

Author of “Medical Anatomy;” “The Causes which excite Respiration in
Health and Disease;” Physiol. Address, 1851, etc., etc.


=Sieveking, Ed. Henry=, 17, Manchester Square, W. M.D. Edin., 1841;
F.R.C.P. Lond., 1852 (Univ. Coll. and Edin.); Pres. Harv. Soc., 1861;
Vice-Pres. Roy. Med. and Chir. Soc.; Phys. Extraord. to H.M. the Queen;
Phys. in Ord. to H.R.H. the Prince of Wales; Phys. to St. Mary’s Hosp.;
Phys. Hosp. for Paralysis and Epilepsy, etc.

Formerly Editor “Medico-Chirurgical Review;” Author of “Manual of
Pathological Anatomy” (with Dr. H. Jones), 1854, etc.


=Sihler, Christian=, M.D., Fellow of Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
U.S.A.

Author of “On the so-called Heat Dyspnœa,” “Journ. of Physiol.,” Vol. II,
p. 192.

Placed some dogs with cervical cord cut, in a heated chamber to test
experiments made previously by Goldstein.


=Silvestri, Luigi=, Perugia. Prof. Università Libera Corso di Zoojatrice.


=Solera, Luigi.= Prof. Catania University.


=Soloweitschyk, Isaac=, St. Petersburg.

Made experiments on the action of the different combinations of Antimony
in the Institute of Experimental Pharmacology, Strasburg. Exper. VIII.,
on a cat weighing about 7¾ lbs. The nervi vagi cut, the animal curarised,
and artificial respiration established, electrodes inserted into the
spinal marrow and an electric current sent through the nerves.-_-Archiv.
für Exper. Pathol._, 12, 5, 6.


=Soltmann, O.= Prof. Med. Fac. Univ. Breslau.

“With reference to the published works of Fritsch and Hitzig on the
motor centres of the cortex, and also (while I am engaged in the same
studies) concerning the experiments of Hermann on electrical stimulation
in Pflüger’s Archives, Vol. X., I feel called upon to make the following
communication:--(1) In newly-born dogs no muscular movements were
observed during electrical stimulation of the cortex cerebri; (2) These
movements were only observed some days (9-11 days) after birth; (3) The
extent and form of the motor centres of the cortex vary; in young animals
they differ from those of fully grown animals. The necessary subjects for
further experimentation (pregnant bitches and young dogs of all ages) are
difficult to obtain so that the experiments only proceed slowly. Breslau,
10 March, 1875.”--_Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wiss._, 1875, p. 210.


=Stefani, Aristide=, Ferrara. Università Libera, Corso di Zoojatrice.

Author (jointly with Weiss) of “Ricerche anatomiche intorno al
cervelletto di Comlombi sani ed operati nei Canali Semicircolari,” Com.
to Acad. Ferrara, 24 Nov., 1877.


=Sternberg, George M.= M.D., Surgeon and Major, U.S.A.

Contrib. “Induced Septicæmia in the Rabbit,” Amer. Journ. of Med.
Sciences, July, 1882; “Experiments to determine the germicide value of
certain Therapeutic Agents,” _Ibid._, April, 1883.

“The object of the present paper is to compare the results obtained in
some recently reported experiments upon rabbits (Report to the Scientific
Grants Committee of the British Medical Association, by Peter Murray
Braidwood, M.D., F.R.M.S., and Francis Vacher, F.R.C.S., Ed., _British
Med. Journ._, Nos. 1,100 and 1,101, 1882) with the writers experiments
made last year, under the auspices of the National Board of Health (a
fatal form of septicæmia in the rabbit produced by the subcutaneous
injection of human saliva).--_National Board of Health Bulletin, April
30, 1881._

“I have demonstrated by repeated experiments that my saliva in doses of
1·25 c.c. to 1·75 c.c. injected into the subcutaneous connective tissue
of a rabbit, _infallibly produces death_, usually within forty-eight
hours.”… “The saliva of four students, residents of Baltimore gave
negative results; eleven rabbits injected with the saliva of six
individuals in Philadelphia gave eight deaths and three negative results;
but in the fatal cases a less degree of virulence was shown in six cases
by a more prolonged period between the date of injection and the date of
death.”--_Amer. Journ. of Med. Sciences_, July, 1882, pp. 71, &c.


=Stevenson, Thomas=, Guy’s Hosp., S.E., and 45, Gresham Road, S.W. M.D.
Lond., 1864; F.R.C.P. Lond., 1871; M. 1864; M.R.C.S. Eng., 1862 (Guy’s);
Lect. on Chem. and Med. Jurisp. Guy’s Hosp.; Analyst Surrey, Bedfordsh.,
St. Pancras, Shoreditch, etc.; Exam. in Forensic Med. Univ. Lond.

Joint Author “On the Application of Physiological tests for certain
Organic Poisons, especially Digitaline;” Proc. Roy. Soc. 1865, and
various Papers in Guy’s Hosp. Reps., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Guy’s Hospital Museum Theatre
and Lecture Room in 1881-82-83. Certificate for Experiments without
Anæsthetics in 1881-82-83. No Experiments returned in 1883._


=Stirling, William=, Marischal College, Aberdeen. B. Sc. Edin. (1st Class
Honours), 1870; D. Sc. (1st Class Honours in Physiol.) 1872; M.B. and
C.M. (1st Class Honours), 1872; M.D. (Gold Medallist), 1875; (Edin.,
Leipsig, Berlin and Paris); Regius Prof. of Insts. of Med. Univ. Aberdeen.

Author of “Text Book of Practical Histology” (plates), 1881; “Outlines of
Physiological Chemistry,” 1881; “Effects of Division of the Sympathetic
Nerve in the Neck of Young Animals,” “Journ. Anat. and Physiol.,” etc.,
etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Aberdeen Physiological
Department in 1878-79-80-81-82-83; Certificates for Illustrations of
Lectures in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. No Experiments returned in 1881._


=Strauss, J.=, 10, Rue Madame, Paris. M.D.; Agrégé at Med. Fac.;
Physician at the Tenon Hospital.

Author of “Des lésions rénales dans leur rapport avec l’hyperthropethie
cardiaque,” Arch. Gén. de Méd., Jan., 1882.


=Stroganow, N.=, St. Petersburg.

Author of “Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Oxydations processes im normalen
und Erstickungs-blute.”--Pflüger’s Archiv., Vol. XII., p. 18.

Made experiments in the Laboratory of Prof. Hoppe-Seyler in Strasburg.

Dogs asphyxiated with an apparatus constructed by direction of Prof.
Hoppe-Seyler after the model of that of Régnault and Reiset.


=Studiati, Cesare.= Prof. Pisa University.


=Suchard= (Prof.), 9, Avenue de l’Observatoire, Paris. M.D.; Prof. of
Gen. Anat., College of France.


=Talma, G.= Prof. Utrecht University.

Author of: “Ueber die Folgen Arterienverschlusses in den verschiedenen
Organen,” Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wissenschaften, No. 46 (1879), p. 817;
“Zur Genese der Herztöne,” Pflüger’s Arch., Vol. XVIII. (1880), p. 275;
“Nog. eens over hart en arterietonen,” Nederl. Tijdschr. v. Geneesk,
1880, p. 661; “Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Einflusses der Respiration auf
die Circulation des Blutes,” Pflüger’s Arch., Vol. XXIX. (1882), p. 311.

Experiments on dogs and rabbits to study the effect of respiration on the
circulation of the blood.


=Tamburini= (Sig.). Prof. at Institut. Psychiatrique of Reggio.

Joint author (with Seppilli) of “Contribuzione allo studio sperimentale
del ipnotismo;” “Rivist. sper. di Psichiat.,” 1882, p. 268; and “Arch.
ital. de Biologie,” Vol. II., 1882.

Experiments on hypnotism in the human subject.


=Teissier, Junr.= (Prof.), 16, Quai Tilsitt, Lyons. Prof. of Clin. Med.,
Med. Fac. Univ. Lyons.

“Made a series of experiments at the Collége de France to prove the
dangers attending the introduction of the negative pole of the battery
into the aneurismal sac (M. Ciniselli’s method). These researches were
made on dogs.”--_Gaz. Med. de Paris_, 1878, p. 129.


=Thin, George=, 22, Queen Anne Street, Cavendish Square, W. M.D., St.
And., 1860; L.R.C.S. Edin., 1858 (Edin.), Contrib. on Histological,
Pathological, and Dermatological subjects in various Journs. and Trans.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, London; the New
Physiological Theatre and the Rooms comprised in the Physiological
Laboratory, together with the Curator’s Room, in 1883. Certificate
Dispensing with obligation to kill same year._


=Tiegel, E.= Asst. at Physiol. Inst., Strasburg, and Private Prof.

Author of “Notizen über Schlangenblut,” Pflüger’s Arch., Vol. XXIII.
(1880), p. 278.


=Tigerstetd, R. A. A.= Prof. Stockholm University.

Author of “Studien ueber mechanische Nervenreigung,” 1 Abth. Helsingfors,
1880; “Die durch einen Konstanten Strom in den Nerven hervorgerufenen
Veränderungen der Erregbarkeit mittels mechanischer Reizung
untersucht.”--_Mittheil vom physiol. Laborat., Stockholm, Bk. I._, 1882,
etc.


=Tommasi-Crudeli, Corrado.= B. at Piere, Santo Stefano, 1834; Prof.
extraord. of Path. Hist. at Inst. di Studii Superiori, Florence, 1863;
Prof. of Path. Anat. Univ. of Palermo, 1865; Founded Physiol. and Pathol.
Inst. at Rome, 1870.


=Topinard= (Mons.), 103, Rue de Rennes, Paris. M.D.; Prof. at the
Institute of Anthropology.


=Toussaint, H.= Prof. at the Veterinary School, Toulouse; Prof. Physiol.
Fac. Sci., Toulouse, 1880.

Author of “Identité de la septicémie expérimentale aiguë et du choléra
des poules.”--Compt. Rend., Vol. XCI. (1880), p. 301; “Note contenne dans
un pli cacheté et relative à un procédé pour la vaccination du mouton et
du jeune chien.”--_Ibid._, p. 303.


=Traube, Ludwig.= B. at Ratibon, 1818; d. at Berlin, 1876. Geheimrath.


=Trojanow= (Dr.), St. Petersburg.

Author of “The influence of extended scalds on the animal organism” (In
Russian), St. Petersburg, 1882.


=Truman, Edgar Beckit=, 31, Derby Road, Nottingham. M.D. St. And., 1861;
M.R.C.S. Eng. and L.S.A., 1860 (Guy’s); Sen. Exhib. and Gold Medallist in
Med., Guy’s; Prizem. Phys. Soc.; F.C.S.; Pub. Analyst, Nottingh. Boro’
and Co.

Contrib. Pop. Sci. Rev., 1863, &c.

_Held a License for Vivisection at 31, Derby Road, Nottingham, in 1882
and 1883. Certificates for Experiments without Anæsthetics, 1882 and
1883. No Experiments returned._


=Turner, George=, High Street, Hoddesdon, Herts. L.R.C.P. Lond., 1872;
M.R.C.S. Eng., 1872; Sanit. Sci. Cert., Cambridge, 1875; (Guy’s and
Montpellier); Prizem. Guy’s Hosp. 1869, 1871; F.C.S.; late Med. Off.
Health and Analyst, Portsmouth Boro’; Sanit. Med. Off. Portsmouth; Res.
Med. Off. Lond. Fever Hosp. and Chef de Clinique intérimaire, Hôpital St.
Eloi, Montpellier.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Portsmouth Borough Laboratory in 1878
and 1879. No Experiments returned._


=Vacher, Francis=, 36, Hamilton Square, and 49, Shrewsbury Road,
Birkenhead. F.R.C.S. Edin., 1878; L.R.C.P. Edin., 1867 (Edin.); Hon. Sec.
N. Western Ass.; Med. Off. Health; House Surg. Roy. Matern. Hosp. Edin.
Contrib. Liverp. and Manch. Med. Surg. Reps. etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at [1]35, Park Road, South Birkenhead in
1878. Certificates dispensing with obligations to kill, and for testing
previous discoveries. No Experiments returned._

  [1] This place has been withdrawn from the Register at the request
      of Mr. Vacher.


=Valentin, Gabriel Gustav.= B. at Breslau, 1810; d. at Geneva, 1883.
M.D., Breslau, 1832; Prof. Physiol., Univ. of Berne, 1836 to 1881.

Author of “De functionibus nervorum cerebralium et nervi sympathici,”
Berne, 1839; “Grundriss der Physiologie des Menschen,” Brunswick, 1846;
“Beiträge zur Anatomie und Physiologie des nerven u. des Muskelsystems,”
Leipsig, 1863; “Versuch einer physiologischen Pathologie der Nerven,”
Leipsig, 1864; “Versuch einer physiologischen Pathologie des Herzens und
der Blutgefässe,” Leipsig u. Heidelberg, 1866, etc.

Made experiments with strychnine on frogs.--Arch. f. exper. Pathologie,
p. 337.


=Vallon= (Mons.), No. 1, Rue Cabanio, Paris. Phys. Hosp. for Mental
Disease.


=Valmont= (Prof.), 90, Rue de la Boëtie, Paris. Med. Fac.; Prof. of
Pharmacol.


=Veltà= (Prof.), Bologna University.


=Verderi= (Prof.), Parma University.


=Vierordt, K. von.= Prof. of Physiol. Med. Fac., Tübingen University.

Author of “Physiologie des Athmens,” Karlsruhe, 1845; “Die Lehre vom
Arterienpuls in gesunden und kranken Zuständen,” 1855; “Grundriss der
Physiologie des Menschen,” Tübingen, 1861; “Ueber Stehen und Gehen,”
_Ibid._, 1865; “Die Einheit der Wissenschaft,” Ibid., 1865; “Der Zeitsinn
nach Versuchen,” _Ibid._, 1868.


=Vincent, E.= M.D.; Prof. Med. Fac., Lyons; Chief Surg. La Charité, Lyons.

Contrib. “Plaies pénétrantes intrapéritonéales de la Vessie;” “Revue de
Chirurgie,” Vol. I., 1881, p. 556.

Made 29 experiments on dogs. Exp. VII.: Abdominal walls of dog cut open
with scissors, bladder drawn out, shot at with revolver. Bladder sewn
together; the wound healed, the dog was again used for an experiment on
the ossification of the marrow, and at the end of a month killed.


=Vintschgau, M. von.= Prof. of Exper. Physiol. Med. Fac., Innspruck
University.

Contrib. to “Handbuch der Physiologie,” edited by Prof. Hermann of
Zurich, Leipsig, 1879.

Author of “Beiträge zur Physiologie des Geschmacksinnes,” Pflüger’s
Archiv., Vols. XIX and XX. (1879); “Die Physiologische Reactionzeit und
der Ortsinn der Haut,” _Ibid._, Vol. XXII. (1880); “Untersuchungen ueber
die Frage ob die Geschwindigkeit der Fortpflanzung der Nervenerregung von
Reizstärke abhängig ist,” _Ibid._, Vol. XXX. (1882).


=Virchow, Rudolf.= Born at Schivelbein, Pomerania, 1821. M.D. (Berlin)
1843; Prosect. Univ. Berlin, 1847; Public Prof. in Ordinary of Path.
Anat., Gen. Path, and Therapeutics Univ. Berlin; Director Path. Inst.;
Hon. Mem. Roy. Med. Soc. London, 1850; Corr. Mem. French Acad. of Med.,
1859.

Author of “Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur Wissenschaftlichen Medicin,”
Frankfort, 1856; “Die cellular Pathologie in ihrer Begründung auf
physiologische und pathologische Gewebelehre,” Berlin, 1859; “Ueber
die Erziehung des Weibes für seinen Beruf,” Berlin, 1865; “Menschen
und Affenschädel,” 1866; “Die Aufgabe der Naturwissenschaften in den
neuen nationalen Leben Deutschlands,” Berlin, 1871; “Die Freiheit der
Wissenschaft im modernen Staat,” Berlin, 1877, &c., &c. Editor of
“Virchow’s Archiv.”


=Vogt, Carl.= B. at Giessen, 1817; Studied Giessen and Bern; M.D. 1839;
Found. Scient. Soc. of German Doctors in Paris; Prof. Univ. Giessen,
1847; Prof. Comp. Anat. Med. Fac. Univ. Geneva, 1852.

Author of “Im Gebirge und auf den Gletschern,” Soleure, 1843; “Lehrbuch
der Geologie und Petrefacktenkunde,” Brunswick, 1846; “Physiologische
Briefe,” Stuttgard, 1845-46; Ibid., Paris, 1875; “Ocean und Mittelmeer,”
Frankfort, 1848; “Untersuchungen ueber Thierstaaten,” 1851; “Bilder
aus dem Thierleben,” 1852; “Koehlerglaube und Wissenschaft,” 1833;
“Vorlesungen ueber den Menschen,” 1864; “Vorlesungen ueber nützliche und
schädliche Thiere,” 1856; “Die Mikrocephalen oder Affenmenschen,” 1866,
&c.


=Voit, Carl von.= B. at Amborga, Bavaria, 1831. Studied Med. at Monaco
and Wurzburg, and in the Labs. of Pettenkofer, Wächter, and Bischoff.
Prof. of Med. Univ. Monaco, 1863; Prof. Physiol. Med. Fac., Univ. of
Munich, 1883.

Joint author with Prof. Bischoff of “Die Gesetze der Ernährung des
Fleischfressers,” Leipsig and Heidelberg, 1860; “Untersuchungen ueber
den Einfluss des Kochsalzes, des Kaffees und der Muskelbewegungen auf
den Stoffwechsel,” Munich, 1860; Editor of “Zeitschrift fuer Biologie,”
Munich and Leipsig. Contrib. to “Handbuch der Physiologie,” edited by L.
Herrmann of Zurich, Leipsig, 1879.


=Vulpian, A.=, 24, Rue Soufflot, Paris. M.D. Paris, 1854; Prof. Path.
Anat. Med. Faculty, 1867; Prof. Comp. and Exper. Path., 1872; Mem. Acad.
of Sciences, 1876.

Author of “Leçon sur la Physiologie générale et comparée du système
nerveux,” 1866; “Leçons sur l’appareil vaso-moteur,” 1874; “Maladies du
système nerveux,” 1879.

“M. Vulpian has recently made a large number of experiments to ascertain
the degree and character of the mechanical excitability of the grey
cortex of the brain. In mammals, dog, cat, and rabbit, in the normal
condition, he could never produce in this way the slightest movement
either in the limbs of the opposite side, or in those of the same side.
The mechanical stimulation was produced by rubbing the surface of
the cortex with a small sponge, or a fragment of amadou, or with the
points of dissection forceps.… If therefore movement resulted from such
stimulation in the experiments of Couty, the effect must have been purely
accidental or the consequence of some experimental error. The results
were also negative when Vulpian repeated the experiments after having
produced inflammation of the surface of the sigmoid gyrus by tincture of
cantharides, by essence of mustard or by nicotine.”--_Lancet_, Sept. 16,
1882, p. 453.

“I have made the section of the facial nerve at its entrance into the
internal auditory meatus, in several dogs, … in other dogs I succeeded
in dividing the facial nerve near its real origin, below the floor of
the fourth ventricle. The results were absolutely identical … I had to
undertake other experiments to find out what would be the effect of the
inter cranian section of the trigeminal nerve on the chorda tympani.
These experiments were made on rabbits. Although numerous, they gave
but few significant results, because several of the animals did not
live long enough after the operation for the divided nerves to show any
very decided changes; or else because in several of them, the section
of the nerve was far from being complete.”--Acad. des Sciences, April,
1878.--_Archives Gen. de Méd._, 1878, p. 751.


=Wagner, Rudolf.= B. at Bayreuth, 1805. Geheimrath and Prof. Physiol. and
Zool., Univ. of Göttingen; Mem. Roy. Soc. of Sciences, Gott.


=Walker, James.= 214, Union Street, Aberdeen. M.B. Aberd. and C.M.
(Highest Honours), 1873 (Univ. Aberd.).

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Aberdeen Physiological
Laboratory and Materia Medica Department, Marischal College, in 1881.
Certificate for Experiments without Anæsthetics in 1881. No Experiments
returned._


=Walton, George L.= M.D. Boston, U.S.A. Contrib. of “Reflex movements of
the frog under the influence of strychnia,” “Journ. of Physiol.,” Vol.
III., p. 308; “The physiological action of Methylkyanethine,” _Ibid._, p.
349.

Experiments on frogs, dogs, and rabbits, made in the Leipsig Physiol.
Laboratory.


=Waters, William Horscroft=, B.A. Camb.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Owen’s College, Manchester,
Physiological Laboratory in 1883, also at University Cambridge
Physiological Laboratory New Museum in 1879-80-81-82-83. Certificates for
Illustrations of Lectures in 1880-81-82-83. No Experiments returned in
1882 and 1883._


=Weber, Arthur=, 33, Boulevard des Batignolles, Paris. Prof. Gen. Anat.
College of France.


=Weir-Mitchell=, S. M.D.; Mem. Nat. Acad. of Sciences, U.S.A.


=Weisman= (Dr.), Prof. of Physiol. and Prosector of Univ., Freiburg in
Baden.


=Wells, Sir T. Spencer=, Bart., 3, Upper Grosvenor Street, W. F.R.C.S.
Eng. (Hon.), 1844; M. 1841; F.K.Q.C.P. Irel. (Hon.), 1867; Dub. and St.
Thos.’s; Mem. Counc. (Vice-Pres. 1880); R.C.S. Eng.; Fell. Roy. Med.
Chir. Soc.; Mem. Roy. Inst., Path. Soc.; Imp. Soc. Surg. Paris; Soc. of
Med. Paris, and Soc. of Phys. Sweden; Hon. Mem. several foreign learned
Societies; Surg. to Queen’s Household; Cons. Surg. Samarit. Hosp. for
Women and Children; late Prof. of Surg. and Path. R.C.S. Eng.; formerly
Surg. Roy. Navy.

Author of “Diseases of the Ovaries, their Diagnosis and Treatment,” 1865
and 1872; “Ten Series of 100 cases of Ovariotomy;” Med. Chir. Trans.
1859-80, and numerous contributions to Medical Papers.

“If we could hope in diseased women for the same series of changes as
have been observed in healthy dogs and rabbits, we might agree more
completely with the conclusions of the German experimenters. But it
is one thing to remove a piece of a uterine horn, or a healthy ovary,
or a bit of omentum or mesentery, from a dog or a rabbit, and a very
different thing to remove a large uterine or ovarian tumour from a woman
whose general health has been more or less affected by the growth of the
tumour.”--_Diseases of the Ovaries_, London, 1872, p. 372.

“I made experiments upon animals for which I have been vilified, but for
which I do not reproach myself.… They corroborate what was known before,
that abdominal wounds well adjusted unite readily. This was not what I
wanted. They proved more, and were the visible standing evidence which I
did want--that, though the other tissues might be brought together, if
the cut edges of the peritoneum were left free, they retracted, direct
union did not take place, and secondary evil consequences resulted.…
Without this convincing demonstration in my hands, I might have gone on
for years, bowing to precepts and oblivious of principles, sometimes
taking up the peritoneum and sometimes leaving it loose, with perplexity
to myself and danger to my patients.”--_Ovarian and Uterine Tumours_,
London, 1882, pp. 197-98.

“Fifteen years after my first operation (in 1842), T. S. Wells came
to Manchester to be present at one of my operations, and made many
inquiries, amongst which--‘Did I include the peritoneum in my interrupted
sutures?’ I replied, ‘Certainly;’ and gave as my reason, that in
two cases where the suture had not included the peritoneum hernial
protrusions had followed. I also added, that peritonitis could only
be set up _once_, whether the sutures included the peritoneum or not.
I was for some time after in correspondence with Mr. Wells, but never
heard of vivisection in connection with ovariotomy, nor can I perceive
any advantage that ovariotomy has received from such experiments. All
my operations from first to last have shown the same average amount of
success--about 75 per cent. I have never practised nor yet countenanced
vivisection. I have given up operating after 400 cases and about 100
deaths.”--_Letter of Dr. Clay, dated April 6th, 1880._

“The whole progress of abdominal surgery dates from the first successful
case of ovariotomy performed by Robert Houston in 1701. Failing to see
the lesson taught by this, and led astray by vivisection, no further
success was achieved till 1809, by Ephraim McDowell, and it was not till
1867 that any substantial gain was made. Disregarding all the conclusions
of experiment, Baker Brown showed us how to bring our mortality of
ovariotomy down to 10 per cent., and again, in 1876, Keith proved that
it might be still further reduced. The methods of this reduction were
such as only experience on human patients could indicate; experiments on
animals could and did teach nothing, for operations have been performed
on thousands of animals every year for centuries, and nothing whatever
has been learnt from this wholesale vivisection.”--Lawson Tait, F.R.C.S.,
“_Uselessness of Vivisection_,” p. 27.


=Wertheim, G.= Prof. Med. Fac. Vienna University.

Roasted 30 living dogs.--_Annual Report of Rudolph Institute_, Vienna,
1867, pp. 172, 183.


=Wilischanin, Paul.= M.D., St. Petersburg.

Made experiments in the Clinical Lab. of Prof. Botkin.

Produced fever in dogs and rabbits by injecting decomposed defibrinised
blood, to try the effect of warm water injections.--_Centralbl. f. d.
Med. Wiss._, Sept. 22, 1883, No. 38.


=Williams, C. J. B.=, 49, Upper Brook Street, W. M.D. Edin., 1824;
F.R.C.P. Lond. 1840; (Edin. Paris, and St. Georg.), F.R.S.; Pres. Roy.
Med. and Chir. Soc. Lond.; Phys. Extr. to H.M. the Queen; formerly Prof.
Med. and Clin. Med. Univ. Coll.; Pres. (1st) Path. and New Syd. Socs.

Author of “Principles of Medicine,” 1856; Several Courses of Lectures on
Physiol. and Clin. Med.; “Medical Gazette,” 1835-45, &c., &c.


=Williams, Dawson=, 4, Oxford and Cambridge Mansions, Marylebone Road,
N.W. M.D. (worthy of gold medal), 1881. M.B. Lond. (Gold Medal in Med.)
and B.S. 1879; M.R.C.S. Eng. (Univ. Coll.)

_Held a License for Vivisection at University College, London, New
Physiological Theatre and Laboratory and Curator’s Rooms in 1882 and
1883. Certificate dispensing with obligation to kill, 1882 and 1883. No
experiments returned in 1882._


=Wirtz, S. H.= Prof. Utrecht University.


=Wittich, W. von.= Prof. of Physiol. Med. Fac. Königsberg University.

Contributor to “Handbuch der Physiologie,” edited by Prof. Hermann, of
Zurich, Leipsig, 1879.


=Wolfenden, Richard Norris=, 64, Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square. B.A.
Camb. (Honours in Nat. Sci.) 1876; M.B. 1880 (Camb., St. Barthol. and
Char. Cross); Lect. on Pract. Physiol. Char. Cross Hosp.; late House
Phys. Lond. Hosp.

Author of “Physiological Chemistry for the Laboratory,” 1880; Contrib.
“Med. Times and Gaz.,” etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Charing Cross Hospital Medical
School, No. 62 and 63, Chandos Street, in 1881 and 1882. Certificate for
Illustrations of Lectures in 1881 and 1882. No experiments returned in
1882._


=Wooldridge, Leonard Charles=, 12, Querstrasse, Leipsic, Germany. M.D.,
M.R.C.S. Eng., 1879; George Henry Lewes Student.

Author of “Zur Gerinnung des Blutes,” Du Bois Reymond’s Archiv, 1883,
p. 389 (Physiol. Abtheil); “Ueber die Function der Kammernerven des
Säugthierherzens,” _Ibid._, p. 522.

Made experiments in the Physiol. Inst., Leipsig, on the exposed heart
nerves of dogs.


=Worm, Müller Jacob.= B. at Bergen, 1834. Studied Med. and Nat. Sci.
at Christiana; Practised Med. in Christiana from 1860-1865; studied
ophthalmology Vienna and Brun, 1866, and then dedicated himself to
Physiology; Private Prof. Christiana, 1870; Prof. Extraord., 1873; Prof.
in Ord., 1878; Pres. Norwegian Med. Soc.

Contrib. various articles to Pflüger’s “Archiv,” “Untersuchungen aus dem
physiol. Lab. in Wurzburg,” “Poggendorff’s Annalen,” etc.


=Wurtz, Ch. Adolphe.= B. at Strasburg, 1817; d. in Paris, 1884. M.D.
Strasburg, 1843; Dean of Faculty of Med., Paris, 1865; Prof. Med.
Chemistry; Prof. Organic Chemistry Faculty of Sciences, 1876.

“Mémoires sur les ammoniaques composeés,” 1856; “Sur l’insalubrité
des résidus provenant des distilleries,” 1857; “Leçons de philosophie
chinique,” 1864; “Traité élémentaire de chimie médicale,” 1864; “Leçons
élémentaires de chimie moderne,” 1866; “Dictionnaire de chimie pure et
appliquée,” 1868-1878; etc.


=Wyatt, William Thomas=, 1, Shaftesbury Villas, Stamford Hill, N. M.A.
Oxon., 1880; B.A. (1st Class Honours in Nat. Sci.), 1876; M.B. 1880;
M.R.C.S., Eng., 1879 (Oxf. and St. Barthol.); Schol. in Anat. and
Physiol., 1877; Foster Prizem. in 1878; and Kirke’s Gold Medallist St.
Barthol.; formerly House Surgeon and House Phys. St. Barthol.

_Held a License for Vivisection at Saint Bartholomew’s Hospital Medical
School in 1878. No experiments returned._


=Yeo, Gerald Francis=, King’s College, Strand. W.C. M.D. Dub., 1871;
M.B. and M.Ch., 1867; Dipl. in State Med., 1871; F.R.C.S. Eng., 1878;
L.R.C.S.T. 1872 (T. C. Dub., Paris, Berlin, and Vienna); Prof. of
Physiol. King’s Coll. London; Lect. on and Exam. in Physiol. R.C.S. Eng.;
late. Asst. Surg. King’s Coll. Hosp.; and Lect. on Physiol. Carm. Sch. of
Med. Dub.; Member of the Association for the Advancement of Medicine by
Research.

Author of “Diseases of the Kidney” (awarded Gold Medal of Path. Soc.
Dub.); Contrib. to Proc. Path. Soc. Dub., etc., etc.

_Held a License for Vivisection at King’s College, London, Physiological
Laboratory and Anatomical Theatre in 1878-79-80-81-82-83. Certificates
for Illustrations of Lectures and for Dispensing with obligation to Kill
in 1878-79-80-81. Certificate for Illustrations of Lectures in 1882 and
1883._

“Why repeat the oft-told tale of horrors contained in the works of Claude
Bernard, Paul Bert, Brown-Séquard, and Richet, in France; of Goltz, in
Germany; and Flint, in America.”--G. F. Yeo, Fortnightly Review, March,
1882.

“I am proud to call him (Goltz) my friend.”--G. F. Yeo, Contem. Review,
May, 1882.

[It was reported in the _British Medical Journal_ and the _Lancet_
that at a meeting of the Physiological Section of the International
Medical Congress, held in London in 1881, Professor Ferrier had shown
two monkeys, a portion of whose cortex had been removed by himself.
As Professor Ferrier had no license for vivisection at the time, a
prosecution was instituted against him for a breach of the law. When the
case was brought into Court, the _onus_ was shifted on to Professor Yeo,
who was a licensed vivisector. Below is a comparison between the facts as
reported and the sworn evidence of the reporter of the one journal and
the editor of the other:--]

_British Medical Journal._

PUBLISHED REPORT, 20th August, 1881.

The members were shown two of the monkeys, a portion of whose cortex
had been removed by Professor Ferrier. Concerning the first of these,
Professor Ferrier said it had been his desire to remove as completely
as possible the whole of the psycho-motor region. Whether in this he
had succeeded perfectly could not be learnt for certainty until after a
_post-mortem_ examination had been made.

REPORTER’S SWORN EVIDENCE. 17th November, 1881.

Q. Did Professor Ferrier offer to exhibit two of the monkeys upon which
he had so operated?

A. At the Congress, no.

Q. Did he subsequently?

A. No; he showed certain of the members of the Congress two monkeys at
King’s College.

Q. What two monkeys?

A. Two monkeys upon which an operation had been performed.

Q. By whom?

A. By Professor Yeo.

_Lancet._

PUBLISHED REPORT, 8th October, 1881.

“The interest attaching to the discussion was greatly enhanced by the
fact that Professor Ferrier was willing to exhibit two monkeys which he
had operated upon some months previously.”…

“In startling contrast to the dog were two monkeys exhibited by Professor
Ferrier. One of them had been operated upon in the middle of January,
the left motor area having been destroyed. There had resulted from the
operation right sided hemiplegia, with conjugate deviation of eyes and
of head. Facial paralysis was at first well marked, but ceased after a
fortnight. From the first there had been paralysis of the right leg,
though the animal was able to lift it up. The arm it had never been
able to use. Lately, rigidity of the muscles of the paralysed limbs had
been coming on. The other monkey, as a consequence of paralysis of its
auditory centres, was apparently entirely unaffected by loud noises, as
by the firing of percussion caps in close proximity to its head.”

COUNSEL’S STATEMENT. 17th November, 1881.

Dr. WAKLEY, _sworn, examined by Mr. Waddy_:--

Q. Are you the editor of the _Lancet_?

A. I am.

Q. Can you tell me who it was furnished his Report?

A. I have the permission of the gentleman to give his name, Professor
Gamgee, of Owen’s College, Manchester.

Mr. WADDY: What I should ask is that one might have an opportunity of
calling Professor Gamgee.

Mr. GULLY: I have my reasons for objecting to this. We have communicated
with Professor Gamgee and I know very well that he will say precisely
what was said by Dr. Roy.

“At a meeting of the Physiological Section of the International Medical
Congress held in London in 1881, Professor Goltz exhibited a dog, and
Professors Ferrier and Yeo a monkey; from the brain of the dog a large
area of the cortex had been removed without producing any such effect as,
according to Professor Goltz, would necessarily result if the theory, as
usually held, of the localisation of function of the cortex were true;
from the brain of the monkey a definite part of the so-called motor area
had been removed, and a localised paralysis produced--a paralysis which,
according to Professors Ferrier and Yeo, could not result if that theory
were not true.”--“_On the Cortical Areas removed from the Brain of a Dog
and from the Brain of a Monkey_” _a Report by Dr. Klein, Mr. Langley, and
Professor Schäfer, Journal of Physiology_, Vol. IV., 1884, p. 231.


=Yule, C. J. F.= M.A.; Lecturer on Exper. Physiol., Magdalen Coll. Oxford.

_Held a License for Vivisection at University Oxford Laboratory, Magdalen
College in 1878 and 1882. Certificates for Illustrations of Lectures,
1878 and 1882._


=Zander, Richard.= M.D.; Prosect. Anatom. Inst., Königsberg, Prussia.

Contrib. to Centralblatt f. d. Med. Wissenchaften, 1879.

“In the year 1878 I made a series of experiments on the results of
section of the vagus in birds, occasioned by the title of the Prize
Essay of the Medical Faculty of Königsberg,--According to Blainville
and Billroth section of the nervi vagi in birds has no influence on the
condition of the lungs. It is to be experimentally proved why birds
die after this operation.… As my experiments in many points contradict
those of Eichhorst, I will here shortly give the results of over eighty
experiments on birds principally pigeons. My completed work, which was
awarded the prize by the Medical Faculty on the 18th of Jan., will
shortly appear.”--_Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wiss._, 1879, p. 99.


=Zuntz, Nathan.= Prof. of Anim. Physiol. Univ., Berlin; form. Prof. at
Bonn; Direct. of the Agricul. Acad., Poppelsdorf.

Author of “Beiträge zur Physiologie des Blutes,” Bonn, 1868; “Innervation
der Athmung,” Biol. Centralbl., Vol. II., No. 6 (1882); “Ueber die
Bedeutung der Amidsubstanzen für die thierische Ernährung,” Arch. f.
Physiol. (1882); “Zur Theorie des Fiebers;” Centralbl. f. d. Med. Wiss.,
No. 32, 1882, p. 561.

Made experiments with curare on rabbits.--“_Ueber den Einfluss der
Curarevergiftung auf den thierischen Stoffwechsel_,” Pflüger’s _Archiv_,
Vol. XII., p. 522.




ADDENDUM.


=Sinéty, Louis de=, 10, Rue de la Chaise, Paris. M.D., 1873. Formerly
Prof. Gen. Anat. Med. Fac.

Author of “De l’État du Foie chez les femelles en lactation” (Thèse),
Paris, 1873; “Traité pratique de Gynécologie,” Paris, 1879; second
edition, 1884.

“On female guinea-pigs, which have only a single pair of mammæ, we have
made the ablation of these glands during lactation.”--“_Manuel Pratique
de Gynécologie_,” Paris, 1879, p. 778.

“I wish to communicate to the Society the results that I have obtained
by the ablation of the mammæ in animals. Dogs and rabbits with their
six or eight mammæ were unable to survive these experiments. I chose in
preference guinea-pigs, which have, as is known, only two mammæ, and in
which the disposition of the ducts renders the operation easy, I might
almost say harmless, even during the period of lactation; for out of six
females operated on in the month of September not one died, and all of
them are still to-day subject to observation.”--_Report of the Meeting
of the Soc. de Biologie, December 20, 1873_, “_Gaz. Méd. de Paris_,”
1874, p. 36.

“I have myself made a fair number of experiments relative to the
innervation of the mammary glands on female guinea-pigs.… Considering
the contradictory results, it would be well to describe the experiments
before arriving at any conclusions.… Experiment No. 1, June 10,
1874.--Guinea-pig in lactation. The mammary nerve on one side is laid
bare, and insulated by means of a thread. The animal exhibits signs
of acute pain, especially when the nerve is stimulated by an electric
current; but the stimulation, prolonged during 10 minutes, produces no
appreciable effect on the teats nor on the amount of milk secreted. I
divided the nerve, and on the following day, June 11, there was as much
milk in one gland as in the other; nor did the electric stimulation
re-applied to both ends of the divided nerve produce any apparent effect
on the glandular function.… I have selected these five experiments
from those I had noted down in my book, as I made them under varying
conditions. In all of them the results were negative.… Rochrig observed
that in the goat the effects were different--as M. Lafont had said--which
proves once more that the conclusions arrived at must not be generalized,
and that the phenomena may vary considerably according to the species
of animal.”--“_De l’Innervation de la Mamelle_,” _Report de la Soc. de
Biologie, October 25, 1879_, “_Gaz. Méd. de Paris_,” 1879, p. 593.


THE END.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VIVISECTORS' DIRECTORY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


