The Project Gutenberg eBook of Brief biographies from American history, for the fifth and sixth grades
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Brief biographies from American history, for the fifth and sixth grades
        Required by the syllabus for elementary schools of New York State Education Department

Author: Edna Henry Lee Turpin

Illustrator: Oscar Edward Grosch

Release date: January 6, 2025 [eBook #75050]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Charles E. Merrill Co, 1907

Credits: Donald Cummings, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES FROM AMERICAN HISTORY, FOR THE FIFTH AND SIXTH GRADES ***



[Illustration: GEORGE WASHINGTON]




  _GRADED SUPPLEMENTARY READING SERIES_

  BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES FROM
  AMERICAN HISTORY

  FOR THE FIFTH AND SIXTH GRADES

  REQUIRED BY THE SYLLABUS FOR ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS
  OF THE NEW YORK STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT

  BY
  EDNA HENRY LEE TURPIN

  AUTHOR OF “CLASSIC FABLES,” “STORIES FROM AMERICAN HISTORY,”
  “FAMOUS PAINTERS,” ETC., ETC.

  NEW YORK
  CHARLES E. MERRILL CO.




  COPYRIGHT, 1907,
  BY
  CHARLES E. MERRILL CO.




PREFACE


“Universal history, the history of what man has accomplished in the
world, is at bottom the history of the great men who have worked here,”
says Carlyle. “The history of the world is the biography of great men.”

What the historian-philosopher esteemed the truest form of history
is undoubtedly the form which appeals earliest and most strongly
to the child mind. This fact has been recognized by educators, and
biographical stories in the lower grades are wisely made the foundation
for more comprehensive work in advanced grades.

The following biographies of men and women prominent in the making of
American history are intended as an introduction to a topical study of
the history of the United States. These biographies are prepared to
meet the requirements of the New York State schools; the author has
followed the plan outlined in the State Syllabus. She has in every
case consulted the most recent and authoritative biographies, and has
endeavored to make the narrative truthful and vivid.




PUBLISHERS’ NOTE


This book contains all the biographical matter required for the fifth
and sixth grades in the Elementary Syllabus of the New York State
Education Department, and follows faithfully the outlines given.

The style is clear, easy, and concise, common words and short sentences
being used.

The aim is to bring out, so far as the brief space will allow, those
biographical and dramatic elements which make the strongest appeal to
the pupil.

While no attempt is made to present a continuous history of our
country, these biographies show its development from the time of
discovery and exploration through the days of colonization and
settlement to the present period of invention and industrial supremacy.




CONTENTS


                                        PAGE

  ADAMS, SAMUEL                          149

  BACON, NATHANIEL                       122

  BALTIMORE, CECIL CALVERT, LORD         105

  BARTON, CLARA                          290

  BELL, ALEXANDER GRAHAM                 236

  BOONE, DANIEL                          200

  CABOT, JOHN                             37

  CARNEGIE, ANDREW                       297

  CHAMPLAIN, SAMUEL DE                    94

  CLAY, HENRY                            247

  CLINTON, DEWITT                        218

  COLUMBUS, CHRISTOPHER                   20

  DE SOTO, FERDINAND                      31

  DEWEY, GEORGE B.                       292

  DRAKE, SIR FRANCIS                      41

  EDISON, THOMAS A.                      238

  FARRAGUT, DAVID G.                     282

  FIELD, CYRUS W.                        236

  FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN                     126

  FULTON, ROBERT                         223

  GRANT, ULYSSES S.                      267

  GREENE, NATHANAEL                      176

  HAMILTON, ALEXANDER                    193

  HENRY, PATRICK                         142

  HUDSON, HENRY                           80

  JACKSON, ANDREW                        240

  JEFFERSON, THOMAS                      186

  JONES, JOHN PAUL                       181

  LAFAYETTE, MARIE JEAN, MARQUIS DE      212

  LA SALLE, ROBERT DE                    100

  LEE, ROBERT E.                         277

  LEIF THE LUCKY                           7

  LINCOLN, ABRAHAM                       257

  MCCORMICK, CYRUS                       230

  MACDONOUGH, THOMAS                     204

  MINUIT, PETER                           84

  MONTCALM, LOUIS, MARQUIS DE            136

  MORSE, SAMUEL F. B.                    233

  OGLETHORPE, JAMES EDWARD               114

  PENN, WILLIAM                          109

  PERRY, OLIVER HAZARD                   204

  PHILIP, KING OF WAMPANOAGS             118

  POCAHONTAS                              58

  POLO, MARCO                             13

  RALEIGH, SIR WALTER                     46

  SCHUYLER, PHILIP                       169

  SMITH, CAPTAIN JOHN                     51

  STANDISH, MILES                         62

  STEPHENSON, GEORGE                     220

  STUYVESANT, PETER                       89

  WASHINGTON, GEORGE                     156

  WEBSTER, DANIEL                        253

  WHITNEY, ELI                           226

  WILLIAMS, ROGER                         76

  WINTHROP, JOHN, GOVERNOR                70

  WOLFE, JAMES                           136




BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES FROM AMERICAN HISTORY

FOR THE FIFTH AND SIXTH GRADES




Leif the Lucky


From the northwestern coast of Europe projects the rock-ribbed
Scandinavian peninsula. The scenery is grand and picturesque, but
the soil is sterile and the climate severe. In this bleak, beautiful
country and on the adjacent islands of the Baltic Sea, there lived, a
thousand years ago, the people called the Norsemen or Northmen.

Their houses were usually long wooden structures a hundred or two
hundred feet in length. Sometimes these houses were divided into
several rooms, but often the dwelling consisted of only one large
hall or living-room. On the floor of stone or hard-trampled earth,
was kindled a fire, the smoke from which found its way upward and out
through the crevices of the high-pitched roof. On three sides of the
room were built beds,--shelf-like structures of boards, with skins for
bedding and blankets.

The Norsemen did not even attempt to wrest a living from the reluctant
soil. At home their days were given to hunting and fishing, their
evenings to feasting in the hall. While they sat at table, the
scalds, as their poets were called, sang or recited tales of battles,
conquests, voyages,--the daring deeds of the vikings or sea-robbers and
the sea-kings of their race. Thus in hunting, fishing, and feasting
passed the winter.

When summer unlocked the storm- and ice-bound harbors, the Norsemen put
forth in their ships. Their long-ships, or ships of war, were long,
narrow vessels; on each side were benches for rowers and over the sides
hung the shining shields of the Norsemen. Hundreds of these little
vessels pushed off boldly from the shores of Scandinavia every summer.
The Norsemen knew nothing of the mariner’s compass, and they directed
their course on the pathless seas by means of the stars. This was a
dangerous undertaking, and in stormy, foggy weather, many a boat lost
its bearings and went down with all on board.

Fleets of the long-boats, however, braved the rough seas and sought
distant lands--the coasts of England, France, Spain, Italy, even of
Greece and Africa. What was their object? Plunder and always plunder.
The fierce, merciless sea-soldiers descended on a land suddenly, like a
thunder-cloud from the blue summer sky. They laid it waste; then, with
stores of gold and silver, household goods and provisions, they sailed
back home. Year after year, century after century, the Norsemen made
these summer raids and were a terror to all the western and southern
coasts of Europe.

But in the course of time, the character of the Norse invasions
changed. The men did not sail forth alone for summer raids. Instead,
men, women, and children went together and wintered on the coasts which
they plundered. Sometimes they remained summer and winter and made the
stolen lands their own. They were so strong and fierce in battle that
few people could withstand them.

They overran the coasts of England, and it seemed as if they would
take possession of the land. But a brave, wise king, Alfred the Great,
defeated them on land, and built boats, the beginning of the English
navy, to defend the coasts. Thus the Norse people in England became
subjects instead of masters.

France, however, did not have an Alfred the Great. In the ninth century
Rolf, a bold Norseman, established himself on the fair coastland of
France. In course of time, the people there were called Normans instead
of Norsemen, and the land they had seized was known as Normandy. These
Normans, like their Norse ancestors, were fond of battle and conquest.
One of them, Duke William, went to England, took possession of the
land, and made himself King William.

The Norsemen went west as well as south, and in the ninth century, they
settled in Iceland. Thence they pushed on to Greenland, where they
established a colony. Farther west than Greenland it is said that they
went, to the continent of America, hundreds of years before Columbus
was born.

Here is the story as the Sagas, or old Scandinavian tales, tell it.

In 985, Bjarni, a merchant and ship-master who was traveling from
Iceland to Greenland, was driven out of his course by a storm and foggy
weather. “They were borne before the wind for many days, they knew
not whither.” When at last calm and sunshine came, they reached a low
wooded shore, probably Cape Cod. Leaving this land on the left, Bjarni
sailed northward, with a favoring wind. Two days later, he again came
near land, low and wooded. This is supposed to have been Nova Scotia.
Again Bjarni turned from the coast which he felt sure was not the land
that he sought, “because they told me,” he said, “that there are great
mountains of ice in Greenland.” Three days later, he reached a rocky,
snow-covered shore. He coasted along this till he found that it was an
island,--probably Newfoundland,--and then again he turned away. A storm
from the south drove him on his course and in four days he reached
Greenland.

He told the story of his wanderings on the western seas, but he did not
attempt to revisit the lands he had found. At last the tale came to the
ears of Leif Eriksen, “a man strong and of great stature, of dignified
aspect, wise and moderate in all things.”

Leif bought Bjarni’s ship and in 999 sailed forth with about
twenty-five men to find the new land. He reached the snow-covered
island--Newfoundland--which he called Helluland, “land of broad
stones,” and he went ashore to see its “frozen heights and bare
flat rocks.” Next he visited the “low wooded land of white sandy
shore”--Nova Scotia--which he called “Markland, land of woods.” At last
he reached the third promontory--Cape Cod,--the first which Bjarni had
beheld; there he landed and passed the winter. From the wild grapes,
then as now plentiful on the coast of Massachusetts Bay, the Norsemen
gave the land the name “Vinland,” land of wine. The next spring they
returned to Greenland, rescuing on the way a crew of shipwrecked men.
From this time Leif was called “Leif the Lucky.”

Two years later Leif said to his brother Thorvald, “Go brother, take
my ship to Vinland.” Thorvald with thirty men spent the winter in the
dwellings Leif had erected two years before; the next summer they
explored the surrounding country and wintered again in “Leif’s booths.”
In the summer of 1004, the Norsemen coasted along the shore exploring
the country. At one time when they landed, they were attacked by
natives, supposed to be Esquimaux, whom they called Skrælings. In the
skirmish Thorvald received a fatal wound from an arrow. His followers
returned to “Leif’s booths” and in the summer of 1005 went back to
Greenland; they gave an enthusiastic description of Vinland, with its
vines, wild corn, fish, and game.

A few years later, Thorfinn Karlsefne and his wife Gudrid with three
ships and one hundred and sixty persons made a voyage to Vinland.
Gudrid’s son Snorri, the ancestor of the famous Danish sculptor
Thorwaldsen, is said to have been born in Vinland. At the end of three
years, the party returned to Greenland. After the death of her husband,
Gudrid made a pilgrimage to Rome, where she described to the pope the
fair new land in the west, the Christian settlement in “Vinland the
Good.”

From Greenland, we are told, hunters and fishermen made frequent
voyages to Vinland. They established settlements there and carried on
a fur trade with the Indians. But in course of time, these posts were
destroyed by the Indians, and the Norse settlements in Greenland itself
were destroyed by war and plague. The western voyages and the memory of
them ceased. Only the Scalds, trained to repeat family histories and
tales of war and conquest, remembered and related the story of Vinland.
In the course of time, these sagas, or stories, were written down,
and centuries later men learned about the Norse colony, or “western
planting,” in the New World.




Marco Polo

A Famous Traveler


You do not need to be told that the world as known to us to-day is very
different from the world as it was known--or misknown--to the people
of the thirteenth century. Two great inventions broadened the horizon
of Europe; these were the mariner’s compass and the printing press.
The mariner’s compass made it possible for men to strike boldly across
unknown seas instead of clinging to familiar shores; the printing press
spread books abroad and conveyed the knowledge of the few to the masses.

To-day, the steamship and the railway unite countries and destroy
distance. Even the parts of the world where these do not penetrate,
own, to a greater or less extent, the power of the great nations of the
world. A citizen of the United States can cross the deserts of Africa
or penetrate the wilds of Asia and be protected by his nation’s flag.
There is hardly a place so secluded that some hardy traveler has not
visited it, describing and picturing the country, people, and customs
so as to make them known to all the world.

Very different was the state of affairs in the thirteenth century. The
European who started east had an unblazed trail before him. He had to
make his way on foot or on horseback, by sail or row boats, through
mountain passes, trackless forests, and vast deserts, and across
streams and seas. On the land, he encountered robbers; on the waters,
pirates. Everywhere were people with unknown customs and strange
languages. The chances were that the adventurous traveler, instead of
returning home, would leave his bones to whiten foreign sands.

Yet one traveler encountered and passed through all these dangers,
returned safe home, and dictated an account of his travels,--a true
story, as wonderful as the tales of the “Arabian Nights.” Perhaps some
day you will read the story of Marco Polo’s travels.

Marco Polo began life with three advantages; he was born in the
thirteenth century, he was a Venetian, and he was a Polo. Venice,
in the Middle Ages, was one of the commercial centers of the world.
The great oceans were as yet uncrossed; the Italian cities sent
forth merchant-vessels which brought across the Mediterranean the
goods conveyed overland by caravans from the East,--the spices,
gold, and jewels of Asia. Among the Venetian families made wealthy
by commerce--the merchant-princes, as they were called--was the Polo
family. About the middle of the thirteenth century, there were three
Polo brothers engaged in commerce.

Two of these brothers went to the East, first to the Crimea and
thence to Cathay, as China was then called. They were probably the
first European travelers who reached China. They went to Cambaluc, or
Peking, where they were graciously received by the great emperor,
Kublai Khan. He was the grandson of Jenghiz, who had made himself
master of northern China. The son and grandson of Jenghiz extended his
conquests, so that the kingdom of Kublai Khan embraced China, northern
Asia, Persia, Armenia, and parts of Asia Minor and Russia. Under this
powerful ruler, the East was not only bound together in one vast
empire, it was open to Europeans as it had never been before and has
never been since. Kublai Khan welcomed the Polo brothers to his court,
and they spent there several years. At last they returned to Venice,
where Nicolo had left his wife; his son Marco, born the year of his
departure, was now a youth of about eighteen.

The Polo brothers remained in Venice two years and then returned to
Cathay. With them went Marco Polo, a brave, intelligent youth. They
passed through the country around the sources of the river Oxus and
crossed the plateau of Pamir and the great desert of Gobi. Much of this
country had never before been visited by Europeans, and we have no
record of its being revisited until a few years ago when the Orient was
again to some extent opened to the world.

The Polos were welcomed back by Kublai Khan, who was at his winter
residence, Cambaluc, where “are to be seen in wonderful abundance the
precious stones, the pearls, the silks, and the diverse perfumes of
the East.” Marco mastered the four languages most in use at court.
The Khan, seeing that he was both intelligent and discreet, sent him
on public business to Kara Korum, Cochin-China, India, and other parts
of the great empire. When he returned, he was able to give the Khan
information stored in his memory and his note books not only about the
business of which he had charge but also about the manners, customs,
and peculiarities of the peoples he had visited. He became a great
favorite with the Khan and was, we are told, made governor of the great
city of Yang-Chow.

At the end of fifteen years, the Polos desired to revisit their home,
and the Khan consented on condition that they would return to Cathay.
Some idea of the difficulty of the return journey may be gathered from
the fact that it took twenty-six months. We are told that their kindred
did not recognize the long-absent merchants. They gave a grand feast in
oriental style; at the end they donned costumes suiting their rank and
ripped apart their travel-worn garments, displaying dazzling wealth of
rubies, sapphires, and other gems therein concealed.

The Polos had been at home only about three years when there arose war
between Genoa and Venice, which were commercial rivals. The hostile
fleets met in battle and the Venetians were defeated. Among the seven
thousand prisoners was Marco Polo, who was an officer on one of the
Venetian galleys. He was put in prison in Genoa and there he remained
about a year. One of his fellow-prisoners was Rusticiano of Pisa, an
author. The Pisan was much interested in the wonderful adventures of
Polo and wrote them down from dictation.

The book consists practically of two parts. The first part, or prologue
as it is called, relates the circumstances of the two Polos’ first
visit to the Khan’s court, their second voyage accompanied by Marco,
and their return home by way of the Indian Seas and of Persia. Polo
informed the Europeans, who thought that eastern Asia ended in swamps
and fog and darkness, that there was open sea east of Asia and that
he, his father, and his uncle had sailed from the southeast coast
of Cathay, or China, to the Persian Gulf. The second part of Polo’s
“Travels” describes the different states and provinces of Asia, and the
court and rule of Kublai Khan. Little is told of the traveler himself,
but we gather that he was a brave, shrewd, and prudent man.

After Marco Polo’s release from prison in 1299, he seems to have
returned to Venice, married, and lived quietly in his native city until
his death in 1324.

“The Book of Marco Polo,” as Rusticiano of Pisa called his work,
was read with much interest and was translated into many languages.
For many centuries it was the only European description of the far
East, written by an eye-witness. Polo was accused of falsehood and
exaggeration, but as people learned more about the lands he described,
they found that, in the main, he was right; he was truthful and
accurate in describing what he had seen, but he was sometimes misled
by the tales of others to whom he listened. In the prologue, Rusticiano
says that he describes things seen by “Messer Marco Polo, a wise and
noble citizen of Venice.... Some things indeed there be therein which
he beheld not; but these he heard from men of credit and veracity, and
we shall set down things seen as seen, and things heard as heard only,
so that no jot of falsehood may mar the truth of our book and that all
who shall read it or hear it read may put full faith in the truth of
all its contents.”

Marco Polo was the first European traveler to make his way across the
whole length of Asia, naming and describing the kingdoms which he
visited. He was the first to describe the Pamir plateau, “the roof of
the world,” the highest level country on the globe, the deserts and
flowery plains of Persia, the wealth and size of China, the manners and
customs of its people, and the splendid court of its emperor, the great
Kublai Khan. He was the first to describe Tibet, and to tell of Burmah,
Cochin-China, Siam, Japan, Java, Sumatra, Ceylon, and India, not merely
as names but as places he had seen and known. He gave an account of
the secluded Christian empire of Abyssinia, of the tropical luxuriance
of the far-off islands, of the negroes and ivory of Zanzibar, of vast
and distant Madagascar, of Siberia and the Arctic shores with their
dog-sledges, white bears, and reindeer. In brief, he described Asia
from Siberia and the Arctic Ocean, to Ceylon, from the Adriatic Sea
to the Pacific Ocean, and to him Europe owes its first geographical
knowledge of Asia.

In the time of Marco Polo, the Mongolian Empire was probably the
largest in the world. He informed Europeans that in the East, which
they thought inhabited by savage and ignorant people, was a wealthy
and civilized kingdom, swarming with inhabitants and _dotted with huge
cities_. He described the palaces and pleasure grounds of Cambaluc, or
Peking, somewhat as they are to-day. He told how “black stones” were
dug out of the earth and burnt for fuel, because they “burn better
and cost less” than wood,--whereat Polo marveled. He told about the
emperor’s granaries for wheat, barley, millet, and rice, about the
wool, silk, hemp, spices, sugar, gold, and salt of the country. At
first it seems strange that Polo did not mention tea, for hundreds of
years the national drink of the Chinese, but we must remember that he
was associated with the Tartar ruling classes and so was to a great
extent ignorant of the manners and customs of the subject natives.

Cipangu or Cipango--that is, Japan--was made known to Europeans by
Polo. He described it as “an island in the high seas,” and said that
the sea around it was studded with thousands of islands rich in spices
and perfumes. Cipango was the only country attacked by Kublai Khan
which was able to resist his power. Its people were civilized and it
was rich in gold and in wonderful pearls, white and rose-colored. Polo
says “rubies are found on this island and in no other country in the
world but this.”

He described India,--the scanty garments of the people and their
magnificent jewels. He gave an interesting account of the diamond mines
of Golconda, and of the cotton plant--more valuable even than those
rich mines--from which fiber is obtained for clothing. He visited and
described the places from which are obtained ginger, pepper, cinnamon,
camphor, and other gums and spices.

Seilan, or Ceylon, was another place visited by Polo. He described the
pearl fisheries there, much as they are to-day.




Christopher Columbus

The Great Admiral


With the name and deeds of Christopher Columbus you are already
familiar. You will be interested in a brief sketch of the main facts
of his life; some day, it is hoped, you will read the story as told at
length by our great American author, Washington Irving.

Careful research has not been able to ascertain the exact year of
Christopher Columbus’s birth. It was sometime about the middle of the
fifteenth century, probably 1445 or 1446. His father was a wool-comber
who lived in a village near the great Italian city of Genoa. Genoa
was a rich commercial city,--the rival of Venice, as you learned in the
story of Marco Polo.

[Illustration: CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS]

Probably Columbus often visited Genoa in boyhood; he early showed his
inclination for a seafaring life and became a sailor when he was about
fifteen. Seafaring then was very different from what it is now. People
knew little of the world beyond Europe, western Asia, and northern
Africa. Sailors were beginning to use the mariner’s compass, but old
habits were still strong, and they did not often venture far from
land. This was not only because they feared that they would lose their
way and be unable to return home. They thought that around the known
land and sea circled the Sea of Darkness, full of raging monsters and
dangerous whirlpools. For centuries some geographers had reasoned that
the world was round, but they never went to see if this were true.
The majority of people believed that the earth was flat like a floor.
Probably that was what Columbus believed in his youth.

We have little record of his early years. “Wherever ship has sailed,”
he wrote later, “there have I journeyed.”

When he was about twenty-five years old, he married and settled in
Lisbon. There he supported himself and his family by making the maps
and charts, so necessary to sailors. He seems to have spent his leisure
reading books of geography and travels, studying old papers and
charts, and talking with seamen. One of his favorite books was the
story of the old Venetian traveler, Polo; as Columbus read about the
vast and wealthy country of Cathay and the island of Cipango with its
houses roofed with gold, he longed to visit them.

As he pondered the matter, he became convinced that these eastern
lands could be reached by sailing west. Old geographers described the
earth as a sphere. Columbus was convinced that this was true. It never
occurred to him that any land unknown to him lay between Europe and
Asia. He thought that the earth was much smaller than it really is and
that Asia was much larger. He believed that the sea which Marco Polo
described as east of Asia extended eastward to the shores of western
Europe. He thought it was about twenty-five hundred or three thousand
miles from Spain to China. This was a great mistake. But Columbus was
much nearer the truth than most men of the day--who thought the world
flat with an edge over which there was danger of falling. And, unlike
the old geographers, Columbus resolved to sail westward to prove the
truth of his theory.

There was living in Florence at this time a learned old man, a scholar
and student, named Toscanelli, who had said he believed that India
could be reached by sailing west. Columbus wrote to this scholar in
1474, telling of his intention to attempt the voyage. Toscanelli sent
him a chart which unfortunately has been lost and wrote, “I praise
your desire to navigate toward the west; the expedition you wish to
undertake is not easy, but the route from the west coast of Europe to
the Spice Indies is certain, if the tracks I have marked be followed.”

Three years later Columbus made a voyage to Iceland. It has been
suggested that he went there because he had heard sailors’ tales of the
news carried to Rome by Gudrid of “Vinland the Good”--the western land
discovered by Leif the Lucky. It is said that in Iceland Columbus met
a learned bishop with whom he conversed in Latin about Greenland and
Vinland. But these northern lands were not the ones sought by Columbus.
He wanted to reach the southern coast, to visit the Cathay and Cipango
of Marco Polo.

Soon after his return from Iceland, it is said that Columbus applied
to his native city, Genoa, to fit out an expedition for a voyage of
discovery. Meeting refusal there and at Venice, he turned to Portugal.
The king of Portugal was not averse to undertaking the expedition but
was unwilling to give Columbus the rank and rewards he demanded in case
of success. The king secretly sent out an expedition to follow the
route indicated by Columbus. But the faint-hearted captain returned
after a brief cruise, saying he had seen no signs of land.

Indignant at this bad faith, Columbus took his little son Diego and
set out in 1484 to present his project to the Spanish sovereigns.
His brother Bartolomeo had gone to plead his cause with the king of
England. Columbus reached Spain at an unfavorable time. King Ferdinand
and Queen Isabella were engaged in a war against the Moors, which
occupied their time and emptied their treasury. However, the matter was
laid before a council of scholars who decided that the plan was vain
and impracticable.

Seven years Columbus attended the Spanish court, hoping against hope
that a decision would be made in his favor. Weary and disappointed, he
at last turned away, in 1491, to lay his project before Charles VIII.,
King of France.

Footsore and dejected, he stopped one evening with his son Diego at the
convent of La Rabida to beg a night’s lodging. There he told the prior
about the plan on which his heart was set,--his longing to add the rich
domains which he was certain lay to the west, to the kingdom of Spain,
his desire to win the great Khan and his subjects to the Christian
faith and extend the power of the Church. This ambition appealed to the
devout prior. At midnight he mounted his mule and rode to the camp to
see the queen and persuade her to give Columbus an interview. He was
successful and Columbus returned to plead his own cause with the king
and queen. The king regarded the project coldly and reminded the queen
that war had emptied the royal treasury.

“I undertake the enterprise for my own crown of Castile,” exclaimed
Isabella, “and will pledge my jewels to raise the necessary funds.”

Columbus was granted the rank and title of admiral over all lands he
might discover and was promised one-tenth of all gold, gems, spices,
and other merchandise from these lands. Leaving his son Diego as
page to the young Prince John, Columbus set to work to fit out the
expedition. It was difficult to secure seamen to venture on the unknown
ocean. At last the required number was secured; some were forced into
service, some taken from jails, some won by bounties in advance and
promises of rewards later.

On Friday, August 3, 1492, Columbus set sail from the port of Palos,
Spain, with three little vessels. The Santa Maria was a decked ship,
ninety feet long, carrying sixty-six men; the Nina and the Pinta,
smaller than the Santa Maria, were boat-like vessels, carrying each
about twenty-five men. Columbus had a letter from the King of Spain to
the great Khan whose realm, Cathay, he expected to reach.

You have read the story of that wonderful voyage to seek an Old World
which ended in the finding of a New. You can in fancy follow the course
of Columbus day after day--his struggles with his timorous, ignorant,
greedy, turbulent, mutinous crew,--his iron will, and determination to
“sail on and on.” Day after day he set his will and courage against
their stubborn fears. Like children, the sailors rejoiced at every
good sign--birds, reeds, and boughs floating on the waters; and were
depressed by every evil omen--calms and contrary winds.

At last one night there was seen the flickering light of a torch, and
the next morning revealed the fair shore of a wooded island. As we
shut our eyes, we can almost see the Spaniards landing on that October
morning. Columbus, richly dressed in scarlet, went ashore, fell upon
his knees, kissed the earth, and gave thanks to God. Then, drawing his
sword and unfurling the royal banner, he took possession of the land in
the name of the king and queen of Spain.

Eyeing the strangers were the natives,--naked, with straight, black
hair, and swarthy skins daubed with paint. Columbus, who thought he
had reached India, called these people Indians, the name they retain
to this day. The island, which he called San Salvador, was one of the
Bahamas. In search of gold, Columbus cruised about, touching one island
after another, Cuba, Haiti, and others of the West Indies. These he
thought were the “thousands of islands rich in spices” which Marco Polo
said dotted the sea around Cipango. Cuba, Columbus at first thought was
Cipango itself, but afterwards he concluded that it was the mainland
of India. Out of the timbers of the Santa Maria, which was wrecked, a
fort was built on Haiti, and here thirty-nine sailors were left.

From Haiti, Columbus set sail for Spain, and he reached the port of
Palos on the fifteenth of March, 1493. Now indeed, his good fortune was
at its height. He was received with almost royal honors. He was bidden
to sit in the presence of the king and queen--an unheard-of honor in
that formal court--while he described his voyage and displayed the
plants and birds and natives he had brought back. Nothing, so thought
he and his sovereigns, remained but to take possession of the spices,
gems, and gold described by Marco Polo.

Another expedition was planned. Instead of having to seek adventures
and criminals to fit out a crew, he had but to choose among the
gentlemen and nobles who contended for the privilege of accompanying
him. A fleet of seventeen ships and fifteen hundred men was fitted
out. With this Columbus sailed away from Cadiz, September 25, 1493.
The good fortune for which he had had to wait so many weary years did
not long abide with him, and ere this voyage was over it had taken its
flight. The colony established on Haiti had by cruelty provoked the
Indians and had been destroyed. On this second voyage new islands were
discovered,--Jamaica, Porto Rico, and others,--a second colony was
established, and one exploring expedition after another was sent out in
search of gold, of which small quantities were found. The turbulent,
disappointed adventurers quarreled with Columbus, and his enemies at
home were active against him. He landed at Cadiz, June 11, 1496, and
laid his case before his sovereigns.

He was restored to royal favor, but it was two years before he could
get another expedition fitted out, and then, May 30, 1498, only six
vessels set sail. This time Columbus followed a southernly course and
reached the mainland of South America, which was visited about this
time by Amerigo Vespucci, a Florentine, who wrote an account of his
voyage. Later, a German geographer spoke of it as “Americi terra,” land
discovered by Americus, and so the land came to be called America.

Columbus at first thought that he had reached another island;
afterwards he decided that this was the coast of Asia and that the
Orinoco was a river in the Garden of Eden. Making his way to the
Indies, Columbus found the colony at Santo Domingo in disorder but
unwilling to submit to his authority. Each side appealed to Spain,
and Bobadilla was sent out to investigate and settle the matter.
He listened to but one side--that against Columbus. With harshness
uncalled-for, had he been guilty of the charges brought against him,
Columbus was sent to Spain, a prisoner, and in chains. The officers of
the ship would have removed his fetters, but he proudly forbade, saying
that they had been put upon him by the agent of the king and queen and
so by their authority.

“I will wear them until my sovereigns order them to be taken off, and I
will preserve them afterwards as relics and memorials of the reward of
my services,” he said.

This he did. His son Fernando “saw them always hanging in his cabinet,
and he requested that when he died they might be buried with him.” The
sight, the thought, of the great admiral brought in chains from the
lands he had discovered turned all hearts to him with indignant pity.
The queen, it is said, was moved to tears. Rewards and satisfaction
were promised Columbus, and Bobadilla was deposed.

Another voyage Columbus was to make,--his fourth and last,--in search
of a strait or passage by which he might reach Portuguese Asia. On May
9, 1502, he set sail with four ships and one hundred and fifty men. It
was a voyage of “horror, peril, sickness, and starvation.” Columbus
sailed along the Gulf of Mexico, coming pitifully near lands as rich in
gold as the eastern ones which he sought. He missed them and found only
savage tribes with a few rings and chains of gold. The story of these
months is a sad one of famine, hardship, disease, tempest, mutiny, and
quarrels with the natives. It was told in after years by Columbus’s
brave young son Fernando, who accompanied him on this voyage. At last
the admiral turned homeward and reached Seville in the autumn of 1504.
While he lay ill, soon after his return, he received the sad news of
the death of his good friend, Queen Isabella.

In vain during the months and years which followed did the admiral
strive to win justice from the king. Old and worn out, he had, as he
said, “no place to repair to except an inn, and often with nothing
to pay for sustenance.” He died, May 20, 1506, thinking to the last
that the land which he had discovered was a part of the Old World.
The voyages of the great admiral did not end with his life. His body
was moved from one tomb to another in Spain, then was carried to the
Cathedral in Santo Domingo and, in 1796, to the Cathedral of Havana.

Seven years after his death, king Ferdinand erected in his honor a
marble tomb, bearing this inscription, “To Castile and Leon Colon
gave a new world.” But the New World slipped from the grasp of the
Spaniards, unable to hold the rich prize. Other nations of Europe
claimed and sought to share it, but the brave and hardy English
overcame one after another of their rivals and established here the
colonies which grew into our mighty commonwealth. The land which
Columbus discovered is a nation richer and greater than the Cathay of
which he dreamed.




Ferdinand De Soto

The Discoverer of the Mississippi River


In Spain and all Europe, men were willing and eager to cross the
western ocean to learn more about the lands Columbus had found. The
early discoverers and explorers thought that these West Indian islands
were the East Indies, off the coast of Asia. They wished to reach the
mainland and get the gold, gems, spices, and silks which Polo had told
them were to be found there. Wealth, even beyond their dreams, the
Spaniards found. Seeking Cathay, they reached Mexico and Peru, rich
in mines of gold and silver. Our famous American historian Prescott,
tells the story of the conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards under Cortez
and the conquest of Peru by the Spaniards under Pizarro. Like a fairy
tale is the history of how a handful of men entered the unknown lands
and made themselves masters of their wonderful treasures. It is a sad
story too, of the greed and cruelty of the conquering white men, of the
suffering and ruin of the gentle natives.

Some of the Spaniards, turning a little to the north, reached land on
Easter Sunday which they call _Pascua Florida_, flowery Easter. In
honor of the day the Spaniards gave to this land of flowers the name
Florida, which was applied to all the country north of Mexico. All the
flowers of that fair land, were not so charming to Spanish eyes as one
ounce of gold, and for this they roamed the country far and wide. It
was not gold, however, which Ponce de Leon sought. His hair was turning
white and he listened with eager credulity to tales of a fountain whose
waters would give perpetual youth. Landing on the coast of Florida
in 1513, he wandered hither and thither in a vain search for this
longed-for fountain. Instead of finding it, he received his death wound
in a fight with Indians.

A few years later, Narvaez was made governor of Florida, and he came
with a force of three hundred men to conquer it. His troops made
their way through trackless swamps and forests and among hostile
Indian tribes, across the peninsula to the Gulf. Here they constructed
rude vessels in which to go to Cuba or Mexico. Through shipwreck,
starvation, and disease, the four hundred were reduced to four men
who after nine years of hardships and wanderings reached a Spanish
settlement in Mexico. There one of them, De Vaca, met and talked with a
young Spanish captain, Ferdinand De Soto.

Ferdinand, or Hernando, De Soto belonged to a Spanish family that
was both poor and noble. As a youth, he attracted the attention of a
gentleman of wealth who took charge of him and educated him. It was
not, however, the patron’s wish that De Soto should marry his daughter;
when he found that this was the young folks’ plan, in order to separate
them he took De Soto on an expedition to the Isthmus of Darien. There
De Soto distinguished himself by his courage and his daring coolness.

In 1528 he left the service of his patron and went on a journey of
exploration, in search of the passage supposed to connect the ocean
west of Spain with that east of Asia. Columbus, Cortez, and others
had searched for this water-way which, as you and I know, does not
exist. De Soto explored more than seven hundred miles of the coast of
Guatemala and Yucatan. As he found no passage between the two oceans,
he decided that there was none and gave up the search.

In 1532, De Soto with a band of horsemen joined Francisco Pizarro, the
leader of the army which invaded and conquered Peru. He was nominally
under the command of Pizarro but was really the master of his brave
band of three hundred volunteer horsemen. Some historians say that the
brave De Soto did more to secure victory than did the cruel Pizarro.
At all events, the higher glory belongs to the young cavalry-man; he
displayed more humanity in his dealings with the natives than any other
Spanish leader and he endeavored to prevent the murder of the captive
Inca, or emperor, of Peru.

The wealth wrested from the conquered Peruvians enriched the Spanish
invaders. De Soto, who had landed in America with “nothing else of
his own save his sword and shield” became master of a fortune of
“an hundred and four score thousand ducats.” He returned to Spain
and married Isabella, his patron’s daughter, from whom he had been
separated about fifteen years. But he was not content to rest at home.
The age’s spirit of adventure and love of wandering was in his veins.
Remembering De Vaca’s tales about Florida, he persuaded the emperor
Charles V. to appoint him governor of Cuba and to grant him the region
of Florida to explore and conquer at his own expense. Adventurers
flocked to join him, hoping that in the unexplored land of Florida they
would find treasures to equal or surpass those of Mexico and Peru.

De Soto’s wife went with him as far as Cuba, and there he bade her
farewell--a final farewell, as events proved--and in May, 1539, he set
sail with five vessels for Florida. He landed at Tampa Bay on the west
coast. From the first he encountered hardship and opposition. Florida
was occupied by Indian tribes naturally fiercer and more warlike than
the Mexicans and Peruvians; they had met with cruelty and outrage,
the outrage and cruelty of the Spaniards under De Leon and Narvaez.
Almost everywhere De Soto found ready-made foes, expert with war club
and bow and arrow. For nearly four years he and his men wandered from
place to place, through morasses and forests, seeking gold and treasure
but finding them not. Disappointed in his search he grew bitter and
merciless. “He was much given to the sport of slaying Indians,” says
one old historian.

The exact route that De Soto followed is in many places hard to
determine. He wandered through Florida and Georgia, probably into South
Carolina and Tennessee, and perhaps as far as North Carolina,--then he
turned southward and approached Mobile Bay. On this southward march
was carried the Indian chief Tuscaloosa. At Mauvila, or Mabila, near
Mobile Bay, a desperate battle took place in October, 1540, between
Tuscaloosa’s warriors and the Spaniards. The Spaniards bought victory
with the loss of eighty men and forty horses, which could ill be
spared. They lost not only forces but hope.

From that time De Soto’s wanderings seem to have been animated by a
dogged resolution not to return without honor and treasure. He learned
that his men planned, as soon as they reached the Bay of Pensacola,
then less than a hundred miles away, to give up the expedition. Swiftly
he resolved that they should not reach Pensacola. Instead of going
toward the coast and the ships containing supplies, he set his face to
the wilderness and marched northward. “He determined to send no news of
himself until he should have discovered a rich country,” says an old
annalist.

“He was an inflexible man and dry of word,” wrote one who knew him,
“who, although he liked to know what the others all thought and had to
say, after he once said a thing he did not like to be opposed; and as
he ever acted as he thought best, all bent to his will.... There was
none who would say a thing to him after it became known that he had
made up his mind.”

Traveling to the northwest, in May, 1541, he reached “a deep and very
furious” river, so wide that “a man standing on the farther shore could
not be told whether he was a man or not.” This was the Mississippi, the
Father of Waters. The Spaniards made boats and crossed the river and
continued their wanderings on the other side, going northward nearly to
the Missouri River. Month after month they sought gold; at last they
turned southward from the vain search. On the homeward journey, De Soto
was taken ill. He faced death as fearlessly as he had met every foe
before. He bade farewell to his men, thanked them for their loyalty and
faith to him, and advised them as to the choice of a leader to take his
place.

The Spaniards did not wish the Indians, to whom they had represented
themselves as immortal, to know that death had overtaken their great
captain. Therefore, in the dead of night they sunk his body in the
Father of Waters, near the junction of the Mississippi and Red Rivers.
After wandering about for several months, they constructed frail
vessels and trusted themselves to the stream. They reached the mouth of
the river and made their way along the coast until the remnant left by
disease and warfare arrived at a Spanish settlement in Mexico.




John Cabot

The Discoverer of the Continent of North America


By virtue of the discovery of Columbus, Spain claimed all the land
beyond the western ocean. The other countries of Europe, however,
refused to recognize its claim to any land except that actually
discovered, explored, and possessed. Kings, nations, private
individuals even, sent out expeditions to discover and settle lands in
the New World, hoping to find treasure and to reach Cathay and Cipango.
We are particularly interested in John Cabot, whose discoveries gave
England its first claim to the New World.

John Cabot was not, like Columbus, a writer as well as a discoverer;
we know little about his life, and the accounts of his discoveries are
meager and contradictory. Cabot was born about 1450, so he was a few
years younger than Columbus. Like him, he was by birth a native of
Genoa. Cabot, however, moved to Venice and became an adopted son of
that City of the Sea. He was a good navigator and went East on trading
ventures. Having an inquiring turn of mind, when he bought cargoes of
spices he tried to learn something about the countries from which they
came.

Like most master-navigators of the time, Cabot was a maker of maps
and charts. He also believed that the world is round; he thought that
Cathay and Cipango and “the spice lands” could be reached by sailing
west. He tried in vain to secure the aid of Portugal or of Spain in
fitting out an expedition to undertake the westward voyage. Columbus
was one of many who were beginning to believe that the world was a
sphere; he was bolder and more persistent than most of them, and had
the good fortune to prove the truth of his theory.

About 1490 Cabot went to England “to follow the trade of merchandises”
and to seek aid in his exploring projects. In 1496 he secured the
countenance of Henry VII. of England, who granted John Cabot and his
sons, Sebastian, Lewis, and Sanctius permission “for the discovery
of new and unknown lands,” “upon their own proper cost and charges.”
In return for his countenance the king was to receive one-fifth of
all profits. Much uncertainty surrounds Cabot’s first voyage. It is
now thought that his son Sebastian did not accompany him, as was long
believed to be the case. Some say that Cabot had two ships, some say he
had five, but an Italian acquaintance writing at the time says that he
made his discovery with only “one little ship of Bristol and eighteen
men.”

Cabot set sail from Bristol in May and returned in August. He sailed
northwest, and it is supposed that the land which he reached was
Labrador. From the time the Norsemen left “Vinland the Good,” Cabot
was the first European to touch the mainland of North America. He
sailed some distance along the coast of what he thought was “the land
of the great Khan.” He saw no inhabitants, but observed that the
sea swarmed with fish, and on his return he suggested that England
should send fishermen thither instead of depending on the fisheries of
Iceland. He noted, too, that “the tides are slack and do not flow as
they do here,” that is, in England.

A few days after Cabot’s return, a Venetian who was in England wrote
his family an account of the voyage. “His name is Zuan Cabot,” he said,
“and he is styled the great Admiral. Vast honor is paid to him; he
dresses in silk and the English run after him like mad people.” The
Venetian went on to say that Cabot “planted on his New-found land” the
flags of England and Venice.

The king was so pleased with Cabot’s first voyage of discovery that it
was promised he should have fitted out for a second voyage a fleet of
ten ships and to man it he was to have “all prisoners except traitors.”
Some merchants of Bristol aided in fitting out the expedition. With
these ten ships, Cabot wished to go on westward to the east, hoping to
reach Cipango, “where he thinks all the spices of the world and also
all the precious stones originate.”

From the time that this second expedition was planned we lose sight of
John Cabot. Whether he returned safe or died on the voyage, we do not
know. The English did not then attach enough importance to the western
world to make records of Cabot’s voyages. They were disappointed at not
finding gold and gems nor a direct passage to the East. To England in
the early sixteenth century the new-found land was valuable only as a
“cod fish coast.”

Sebastian Cabot, the son of the “great Admiral,” was, like his father,
a chart-maker and navigator. He is said to have accompanied his father
on one or both of his voyages, but there is no proof that he went on
either.

The great object of Sebastian Cabot’s ambition was the discovery of
a direct route to Asia. He undertook, under authority of the king of
Spain, a westward expedition to reach the Pacific. On this voyage
he discovered a great river which he named La Plata. Afterwards he
returned to England and received from Edward VI. a pension for his
services as Great Pilot. In 1553, he took part in the expedition to
find a northeast passage to Asia; later, in search of a northwest
passage, he sailed along the coast of America as far south, it is said,
as Chesapeake Bay.




Sir Francis Drake

A Famous English Adventurer


The first expeditions which came to the New World were bent on
discovery, exploration, conquest, and plunder. It was many years before
any attempts at settlement were made. The Spaniards, as you know, kept
a southernly course and reached the West Indies and the adjacent coasts
of North and South America. They reached Mexico and Peru, and made
themselves masters of silver, gold, and other treasures.

It never occurred to them that the natives had any rights to be
regarded. The only right that they recognized was that of the
strongest. Against their war horses and coats of mail and firearms,
what were the reed spears and arrows of the natives? The Indians fell
before the Spaniards like grain before the scythe.

To the conquered natives, life was a worse fate than death. With brutal
cruelty they were driven to labor in the mines for their taskmasters.
Ship after ship crossed the ocean, bearing to Spain the treasures taken
from these mines, or stolen from the homes and temples of the living
and the tombs of the dead.

But the Spaniards were not suffered to possess nor convey in peace
their ill-gotten gains. The other nations of Europe took advantage
of every pretext to spoil the spoiler. England was foremost in these
attacks on Spain. The two countries were not at open war, but they
were on unfriendly terms. The expeditions against Spain were undertaken
by bold seamen who took as much delight in the damage inflicted on
Spain as in the booty gained. They were not openly authorized by the
English queen, but it was understood that they would be overlooked and
that Elizabeth was not averse to receiving a share of the booty.

Among the freebooters most feared and hated by the Spaniards was Sir
Francis Drake. This famous English seamen was born about 1540, in
Devonshire, England. He was one of the twelve sons of a poor naval
chaplain, and it is said that he was educated at the expense of Sir
John Hawkins, a famous naval officer who was his kinsman. At the age
of eighteen, Drake had become master of a ship that traded between
England and France and Holland. This vessel he sold, “the narrow seas
not being large enough for his aspiring mind,” and invested all his
savings in Hawkins’s expedition to Mexico. This fleet was defeated by
the Spaniards, and Drake, who behaved gallantly in action, lost his
all. He “vowed the Spaniards should pay him with interest,” and shortly
afterwards he made good his word.

In 1572 with three small ships, he attacked and plundered several
Spanish settlements on the Isthmus of Panama and brought away as much
silver, gold, and jewels, as he could carry. During this expedition,
accompanied by eighteen Englishmen and thirty Indians, he made a
journey across the Isthmus. From the top of a tree, he beheld the
waters of the Pacific, and expressed his resolve to “sail once in an
English ship on that sea.” After his return to England, he served four
years in Ireland, but he did not forget either the western ocean or
his resolve. Secretly encouraged by Queen Elizabeth, he undertook an
expedition “to discomfort the Spanish as far as possible.”

A few days before Christmas in 1577, he set sail from Plymouth,
intending to pass through the Straits of Magellan and make the circuit
of the globe. Drake’s fleet consisted of five small vessels and a crew
of a hundred and sixty-six men. In the end, two of these vessels were
left on the coast of Brazil. As Drake passed the western coast of
America he stopped to attack the Spanish settlements. We are told that
his men “being weary, contented themselves with as many bars and wedges
of gold as they could carry, burying above fifteen tons of silver in
the sand and under old trees.”

In August, 1578, Drake entered the Straits of Magellan. Adverse
currents and storms separated the three vessels and only the Golden
Hind, originally called the Pelican, passed through to continue the
course. Along the coasts of Chili and Peru the Englishmen sailed,
plundering till they were weary of spoils. From one ship they got “a
prodigious quantity of gold, silver, and jewels,”--“thirteen chests of
coin, eighty pounds of gold, twenty-six tons of silver, besides jewels
and plate.” The writers of the time who give an exact list of the
captured treasures passed lightly over the natural objects and wonders
of the New World. “They saw many strange birds, beasts, fishes, fruits,
trees, and plants too tedious to mention,” says one.

Drake coasted along the western shore of America, trying to discover a
passage to the Atlantic. He landed and claimed the country, which he
called New Albion, for Queen Elizabeth and England. Turning from the
severe cold of the northern seas, he sailed across the Pacific and the
Indian Ocean, stopping at Java and other islands. Resuming his voyage,
he doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and sailed along the coast of Africa.

In November, 1579, he re-entered the harbor of Plymouth, having made
the circuit of the globe in two years and ten months. He was the
first commander to take his ship around the world; Magellan, who had
undertaken the same voyage, died on the route. Drake, “the master thief
of the unknown world,” at once became a popular hero. He presented to
the queen “great stores of silver, gold, and gems,” and received from
her the honor of knighthood.

A few years later, war was openly declared between England and Spain.
Drake was sent with a fleet to attack the Spanish colonies in America;
he captured and plundered several settlements in the West Indies and in
Florida, and burned the fort of St. Augustine. Sailing on north to Sir
Walter Raleigh’s colony at Roanoke, he brought away the disheartened
colonists. It is said that he carried back to England the potato and
the tobacco, two plants contributed by the New World to the Old.

Drake reached England in 1586, and the next year he led a fleet
to inflict injury on the great Spanish fleet, proudly called the
Invincible Armada, which was being collected to invade England. He
entered the harbor of Cadiz and burned about a hundred ships. This he
called “singeing the beard of the king of Spain.” The Armada, delayed
for a year by this mischance, was refitted and sailed to attack
England. It is said that when the news of its approach was brought to
Plymouth the commanders of the English fleet were playing bowls. Drake,
who served as vice-admiral under Lord Howard, insisted on finishing
the game, saying, “There is plenty of time to win the game and thrash
the Spaniards, too!” The great Armada was defeated by the brave little
English fleet, aided by tempests and contrary winds.

In 1589 Drake made an expedition to Portugal and a few years later he
and Sir John Hawkins were sent with a fleet to attack the West Indies.
He and his old commander could not agree on the plan of action, and
their expedition was unsuccessful. Hawkins died at Porto Rico. A few
weeks later, Drake died, “his death being supposed to be hastened by
his unsuccessfulness in his voyage; his great spirit always accustomed
to victory and success, not being able to bear the least check of
fortune.”




Sir Walter Raleigh

The Father of American Colonization


You are not to suppose that the English claimed nothing of the New
World except what they could plunder from Spain. They were, on the
whole, willing to respect the rights of Spain to the West Indies and to
the adjacent parts of the continent which Spaniards had discovered and
settled.

More and more the English thought that it would be a good thing to have
colonies in the New World to hold the land which they claimed by virtue
of Cabot’s discoveries. Reasons for “western planting,” or establishing
colonies in America, were given by Hakluyt, an Englishman of the
sixteenth century. Among its advantages, he said, were these,--(1)
the soil yields products needed for England, (2) the passage was so
easy “it may be made twice in the year,” (3) “this enterprise may stay
the Spanish king from flowing over all the face of that waste firm of
America,” (4) it may enlarge the glory of God and “provide safe and
sure place” for religious refugees, (5) poor men and those of evil life
may there begin anew, (6) wandering beggars “may there be unladen.”

[Illustration: SIR WALTER RALEIGH]

The “Father of American Colonization” was an English gentleman, a
soldier, courtier, and author, Sir Walter Raleigh. He was born in 1552
in Devonshire, a fair coastland, the home of Drake and many other bold
seamen. In Raleigh’s home were several children, an own brother and
three half-brothers, the children of his mother by a former marriage.
One of these half-brothers, thirteen years his senior, was Humphrey
Gilbert who grew to be a brave and enterprising gentleman.

Walter Raleigh seems to have had little schooling in his youth. He
chose war as his profession and spent several years fighting in France
and the Netherlands. Meanwhile his half-brother, Sir Humphrey Gilbert,
obtained from Queen Elizabeth a grant of land for “planting and
inhabiting certain northern parts of America which extended beyond the
twenty-fifth degree of north latitude.” Raleigh returned to England
and sailed with Gilbert in 1579 to Newfoundland; storms and perhaps an
encounter with the Spanish forced them to return without landing.

Raleigh spent two years in Ireland, fighting to suppress the risings
there, then returned to England and became a favorite at court. There
is a pretty story of the way in which he was first brought to Queen
Elizabeth’s notice and favor. It is said that one day the queen was
walking with her attendants along the London streets, then rough and
unpaved. She came to a mudhole, and hesitated for fear of soiling
her shoes. Among the bystanders was Raleigh, a handsome, graceful,
gentleman-soldier. He took off his new velvet mantle and spread it upon
the ground so that the queen might pass dry-shod.

However he first won the queen’s notice, he had by 1583 become such a
favorite that she was not willing for him to join Sir Humphrey Gilbert
on a second expedition to Newfoundland. He contributed a large share
of the expenses of this expedition, which was even more ill-fated than
the former one. Sir Humphrey, it is true, reached Newfoundland and took
possession of it, but on the return voyage the fleet was overtaken by
storm, and two vessels, in one of which was Sir Humphrey, were lost.

These disasters did not destroy Sir Walter’s interest in discoveries.
He got the queen to transfer to him the grant made to his half-brother,
giving him for six years the privilege of sending out expeditions “to
discover such remote barbarous lands as were not actually possessed by
any Christian people,” and to take possession of them in the name of
the queen.

Several expeditions were sent out under this grant, or patent, as it
was called. The first, in 1584, consisted of two vessels under Captains
Philip Amidas and Arthur Barlow. They reached the coast of North
Carolina and cast anchor on the island of Roanoke, which they claimed
in the queen’s name and for Sir Walter’s use. The name Virginia
was given to this land in honor of Elizabeth, the virgin queen. No
settlement was made at that time but the next year seven vessels under
Sir Richard Grenville were sent out with about a hundred colonists.
They entered Chesapeake Bay and James River and explored the country.
Homesickness and hardships discouraged these colonists, and when Sir
Francis Drake came to the settlement, after his expedition against the
Spaniards in the West Indies, they embarked with him and returned to
England. A few days after their departure, reinforcements and supplies
sent by Raleigh reached the deserted colony.

About this time tobacco, introduced into England by Lane, Hawkins, or
Drake, was brought into use by Sir Walter Raleigh. Tytler says, “There
is a well-known tradition that Sir Walter first began to smoke it
privately in his study, and his servant coming in as he was intent upon
his book, seeing the smoke issuing from his mouth, threw all the liquor
in his face by way of extinguishing the fire; and running down stairs
alarmed the family with piercing cries that his master, before they
could get up, would be burnt to ashes.”

In 1587 another colony of two hundred and fifty men under John White
was sent by Sir Walter Raleigh. That summer a child was born to Eleanor
Dare, John White’s daughter; this girl, the first English child born in
America, received the name of Virginia Dare.

Fears of the Spanish invasion which threatened England kept Sir
Walter for several years from sending aid to the colony. When at last
ships reached Roanoke Island the colonists and all signs of them had
disappeared; on a tree was found carved the word “Croatoan,” but what
this meant no one ever knew.

Raleigh now gave up his patent to a company in London, from which
he was to receive one-fifth of gold and silver found in the lands
discovered. He gave up his colonizing plans in order to fight the
Spaniards. The queen, however, would not consent to his going, as he
wished, on the English expedition to seize the Spanish treasure-fleet.
His place was taken by Sir Richard Grenville, the story of whose
gallant death is told in Lord Tennyson’s ballad, “The Revenge.”

Later, Raleigh sent out an expedition to the interior of South America;
he believed that in Guiana was situated El Dorado, a fabled land of
gold and treasure. He himself on a later voyage went four hundred miles
up the Orinoco River and brought back some gold and the first mahogany
wood seen in England. He wrote an account of his “Discovery of the
Large, Rich, and Beautiful Empire of Guiana.”

In 1603 James I. succeeded Elizabeth on the English throne, and from
that time Raleigh was in disfavor. He was accused of treason; on the
unproved charge he was condemned to death and was kept in prison about
thirteen years with the sentence hanging over him. During this time
he devoted himself to study and wrote his noble “History of the World.”

He was released in 1616 to lead an expedition to the Orinoco. There
he had a skirmish with the Spaniards and brought back no treasure
to appease the king for this attack on the enemy with which James
was trying to keep on friendly terms. The old charge of treason was
revived, and Sir Walter was beheaded in 1618, really as a sacrifice to
gain the good will of Spain. “We have not such another head to be cut
off,” said a bystander at the execution.




Captain John Smith


  “Let him not boast who puts his armor on
  As he who puts it off, the battle done,”

says an American poet. To the credit of John Smith--soldier, leader,
reformer, discoverer, author--be it remembered that he never “talked
big” till he had “acted big,”--that his deeds ever went before his
words.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH]

He was the first Englishman who wrote a book in the United States.
His “True Relation of Virginia” was written in the intervals between
tree-cutting, house-building, exploration, and adventure, and sent
by the vessel which returned to England in June, 1608. Much doubt
has been cast--Fiske and other historians assert that it has been
unjustly cast--on Smith’s statements. In details--dates and figures--we
may believe that the soldier-author was not always accurate. Had he
misrepresented facts, or misstated essentials, however, we may be sure
he would have been promptly and eagerly contradicted by the “gentlemen
of rank” who were actors and eye-witnesses with him, and who never
missed an opportunity to vent their jealous hate on plain John Smith
who outshone them all.

John Smith was born in Lincolnshire, England, about 1580. As a child he
longed for a life of adventure, and when he was thirteen he sold his
school-books and planned to go to sea; however, he thought better of
the matter and remained at home two years longer with his mother. After
her death he went to the Continent and became a soldier. He served
in France and in Holland and then drifted East to fight against the
Turks. There, he tells us, he had wonderful adventures. During a siege
he fought three Turkish soldiers, one after another, and killed them
all. Later, he was taken prisoner and sold as a slave, but escaped. He
made his way home, through Russia, Austria, Spain, and Morocco. When he
reached England in 1605, he found an expedition being planned to settle
the New World and he resolved to join it.

The first English expeditions to make settlements in America were
sent out under the authority of Sir Humphrey Gilbert, Sir Walter
Raleigh, and other individuals. Later on, the difficult and expensive
work of colonization was undertaken by companies. These had regular
trading agents and workmen, and expected rich profits from trade with
the colonies. The colonies in the New World were encouraged by the
sovereign, also, who regarded them as a check on the power of Spain to
the south and on that of France to the north.

A band of about a hundred men sent out by the London Company, left
England in December, 1606, in three little vessels, the Discovery, the
Good Speed, and the Susan Constant. The party was led by Christopher
Newport who had served under Raleigh and had himself captured Spanish
treasure-ships. After a roundabout voyage by the West Indies, further
delayed by contrary winds, in the spring of 1607 the colonists entered
a noble bay. “The low shores were covered with flowers of divers
colors; the goodly trees were in full foliage, and all nature seemed
kind and benignant.”

The Englishmen called the capes on either side of the bay Cape Henry
and Cape Charles, in honor of the king’s two sons; the river up which
they sailed and the settlement they founded were named for King James.
The landing at Jamestown was made May 13, 1607.

The band was ill fitted for the work before it. In it there were
only a few workmen, carpenters, blacksmiths, and masons, and many
“gentlemen”--men “that never did know what a day’s work was,” and that
came for adventure or in search of gold. There had been, it seems,
jealous disputes on the way out, and John Smith had been put under
arrest. After they landed, the settlers opened the sealed instructions
given when they left England and found that Smith was appointed one
of the directors of the colony; at first he was not allowed to take
his place, but in course of time he became not only a director, but
president, of the colony.

Some of the colonists busied themselves those spring days planting
gardens as in England, and planting also cotton and orange trees, we
are told. Others looked around for gold and set out to discover the
Pacific Ocean, which they thought was near at hand. Unfortunately a
malarial site had been chosen for the colony, and in the hot, wet
summer, the men, unaccustomed to the climate, fell sick.

Their ill-health was increased by bad water and lack of food. By
September half of the hundred colonists had died of famine and fever:
there were not enough able-bodied men to bury the dead in decent
fashion; the bodies were “trailed out of their cabins like dogs to
be buried.” Fortunately the Indians did not choose this time for an
attack; instead, they brought corn and game to trade for beads, bells,
and other trinkets.

The Indians of this section were Algonquins, like those later
encountered in Massachusetts, but these were stronger and more hostile.
They attacked the white men, “creeping from the hills like bears, with
their bows in their mouths.” They were repulsed, but for many years
there was the fear and danger of them for the colonists.

The Jamestown colony, like many of the other early ones, was managed by
a “common-store system.” All food and supplies raised or bought were
put into a common store-house and dealt out in equal portions. All
articles collected for export were put into a common store and sent
back to England. There was no reward for individual effort, and many of
the colonists shirked work or labored in a half-hearted fashion.

There was one man who was always ready to do his part and do it well.
This was John Smith. He helped cut trees, and build cabins, and erect
a log palisade around the settlement. He was liked and feared by the
Indians from whom he secured corn needed by the colonists. He was a
sober and upright man and endeavored to establish law and order in the
colony. In order to check the use of bad language, he had account kept
of the oaths uttered by each man and at night for each one a can of
cold water was poured down his sleeve. Strict as he was, he was always
just and reasonable; he set the example of working hard, and never
required of others more than he was willing to perform himself.

His chief relaxation was an adventurous journey in boat or afoot
through the country, of which he gave a glowing description. “Here
are mountains, hills, plains,” he said, “and rivers and brooks all
running most pleasantly into a fair bay, compassed but for the mouth,
with fruitful and delightsome land.... The vesture of the earth in most
places doth manifestly prove the nature of the soil to be lusty and
very rich.”

On one of the expeditions, in December, 1607, into Powhatan’s country
he and the men with him were captured. He was carried to the chief
Powhatan--an old man who was “well beaten with many cold and stormy
winters,” said Captain Smith. Captain Smith tells us that he was
released at the request of the chief’s daughter, Pocahontas, just as he
was about to be killed. This story has been doubted. Nothing is said
about it in the “True Relation” sent from Virginia in 1608. But this
book was brought out by the directors of the Company. It was not to
their interest to publish an incident which showed that the settlers
had the hostility of the great Indian chief. The Company wished the
colony to be thought successful and prosperous so as to induce men to
go out. Later, settlers found it impossible to inform their friends at
home of their sufferings.

In 1608 came more colonists, including some women and children. In this
year Captain Smith set out in an open boat and explored Chesapeake Bay,
of which he made a map that remained the authoritative one for over
a hundred years. Smith returned to Jamestown in September, and was
elected president of the colony which was in sore straits, needing a
firm and able man at its head. “You must obey this now for a law,” he
said, “He that will not work shall not eat.” Under this rule disorder
was suppressed and idlers were forced to labor. Smith’s prudence and
wisdom saved the colony from ruin.

In 1609 five hundred new colonists came out, commanded by men hostile
to Smith. He seems to have been in frequent conflict with them, and
finally he returned to England to defend himself against their charges
and to have treatment for a painful wound. After his departure, took
place the terrible “Starving Time.” The colonists refused to work,
they were attacked by the Indians, and laid waste by disease. By
famine, fever, and war, the colonists in a few months were reduced in
numbers from five hundred to sixty. They embarked to leave the scene of
misery, but met a ship containing food and supplies and turned back.
Thus near failure came the colony which laid the foundation of English
civilization, and religious and civil liberty in America. After a time
the common-store system was abolished and each man was given land to
cultivate for himself; then “three men did more than thirty before.” In
1612 John Rolfe began the cultivation of tobacco and this became the
currency of the colony, the source of its wealth and prosperity.

Captain Smith never revisited the Jamestown colony. In 1614 he came as
“Admiral of New England” to explore North Virginia, as the northern
part of America was called, and made a map of the country which he
called New England. The next year Smith set out with the intention
of planting a colony in New England. But he was taken prisoner by
the French, and finally made his way back to England. There he spent
quietly the sixteen years remaining to him. He wrote in 1616 a
“Description of New England;” in 1624 he contributed a description of
Virginia to a “General History of Virginia,” which was compiled at the
request of the London Company. At the time of his death, in 1631, he
was busy writing a “History of the Sea.”




Pocahontas

An Indian Princess


The white men who came to America naturally felt much interest in the
new race of people which they called Indians. These were divided into
tribes, differing in dialects, habits, and customs, but resembling one
another in many respects. They lived, for the most part, in tents,
called wigwams, made of skins or bushes. Their garments were usually
made of the skins of buffaloes, deer, and other animals; they wore,
also, beautiful mantels of feathers, strings of pearl, and ornaments
of copper, silver, and gold. Their food was the game and fish obtained
by the skill of the men, and the maize and beans raised in the fields
tilled by the women and children. Their tools and weapons were made of
sharp stones and of sticks hardened in the fire; the use of iron was
unknown.

Powhatan was the chief of the strong and warlike tribes of Indians
which the English colonists found dwelling on the banks of the River
James. Powhatan had many children, one of whom, a daughter, called
Pocahontas, was about twelve years old when the English settled in
Jamestown. Captain Smith says that when he was a prisoner in one of
her father’s wigwams she visited and made friends with him. When he
was sentenced to death, he tells us that she interceded for him and
that his life was spared at her request. According to Indian custom,
the enemy whose life was thus granted became a son of the tribe; and
Captain Smith lived for awhile with Powhatan’s tribe. In the course of
time he was allowed to return to his countrymen at Jamestown.

There were few farmers among the English settlers and they had to learn
to adapt their methods to the crops and climate of the new land. Their
crops were scanty at first and they often suffered for food. In times
of need, the Indian maiden, Pocahontas, more than once came to their
relief, bringing food. She went, too, at night to warn the people of an
intended Indian attack. No wonder the English called her “the dear and
blessed Pocahontas.”

Powhatan seems to have been from the first suspicious of the white
men; as time passed he came more and more to dislike and fear them. He
had allowed them to settle on his land, thinking that they wanted it,
Indian-fashion, for a season of hunting and fishing. But year after
year passed and the white men remained in possession. Many died and
some returned to England, but for every one that died or went away ten
came. Powhatan would have liked to drive them away, but the Indians,
with bows and war clubs, were no match for the white men, with guns and
swords. Powhatan resolved to get guns and swords and make them fight
against the white men. In one way and another, he got possession of
many weapons,--some were bought with corn, some were stolen, some were
taken from prisoners.

The matter became so serious that Captain Argall devised a plan to
get back the weapons and also some prisoners taken by Powhatan. At
this time, 1614, Pocahontas was visiting some friends who lived near
the Potomac River. Captain Argall persuaded an Indian named Japazaws,
and his wife, to entice Pocahontas on board his vessel. The Indian
woman pretended that she wished to go on board to see the ship and her
husband told her she could not go alone. To gratify her, Pocahontas
agreed to accompany her. Captain Argall “secretly well rewarded
Japazaws with a small copper kettle” and some other articles, which we
are told he valued so highly that “doubtless he would have betrayed
his own father for them.”

Pocahontas was carried to Jamestown, and messages were sent to her
father that “Powhatan’s delight and darling” would be held prisoner
until the English men and weapons were surrendered. “This news was
unwelcome and troublesome unto him partly for the love he bore to his
daughter and partly for the love he bore to our men, his prisoners ...
and those swords and firearms of ours,” says an old historian. After
three months delay, Powhatan sent seven men and some guns and offered
these and a store of corn for his daughter’s release; the English,
however, refused to release Pocahontas till all that they required was
done.

Month after month passed. It was now eight years since Pocahontas, the
child, had first seen English faces. She was a woman grown--gentle,
generous, and noble of nature. John Rolfe, “a gentleman of approved
behavior and honest carriage,” loved the Indian maiden and his love
was returned. Pocahontas was baptized and given the Christian name of
Rebecca. Then she and Rolfe were married in the church at Jamestown,
April 5, 1614. “Ever since then,” says the historian Hamor, “we have
had friendly commerce and trade, not only with Powhatan, but also with
all his subjects round about us.”

About two years after Pocahontas and Rolfe were married they went to
England, carrying with them their little son. John Smith wrote a letter
to the queen telling how Pocahontas had saved his life and the colony
and bespeaking for her the queen’s favor. She was received at court
like a princess. “She did not only accustom herself to civility,” says
a writer of the time, “but carried herself as the daughter of a king.”
The Indian princess never returned to her native land. On the eve of
her departure, she was taken ill and died in England, leaving one
little son.




Miles Standish

A Pilgrim Leader


Early in the seventeenth century, James I. was king of England. He was
a very self-willed man and was unwilling for his subjects to differ
from him in religious or political matters. Naturally, all men were not
willing to accept his opinions. Some were so unwilling to be dictated
to by the king that they preferred to leave their homes in England and
go where they could worship according to their own preferences. Some
of these men, called Separatists because they had separated themselves
from the established church of England, went in 1607 to Holland.

There they had full liberty in religious matters, but after a time they
became dissatisfied.

The Dutch people were not strict enough in the observance of Sunday
to please them, and their children were learning Dutch language and
customs and would grow up to be Dutch men and women instead of English.
These Separatists loved their native land and wanted their children to
grow up English, but with their own religious views. Moreover, fighting
between Spain and Holland was beginning again after ten years of peace
and the Englishmen did not wish to become involved in this war.

So they resolved to go to the New World and establish a settlement
there. They discussed many places before they decided where to go.
They thought of Guiana which Raleigh had described as being fertile
of soil and mild of climate, but they remembered his fights with the
Spaniards and wished to avoid so troublesome a neighbor. There was the
same objection to Florida, where a French colony had been destroyed
by the Spaniards. They did not care to go to the English settlement
at Jamestown, where the people were devoted to the Established Church
of England and observed its forms even more strictly than people in
England. They did not wish to go to the far north, for some Englishmen
had already tried to settle in Maine and had come home with pitiful
tales of their suffering during the severe winters. The Pilgrims, as
these English religionists began to be called, from traveling about
so much, at last decided to settle between Jamestown and Maine, about
the coast of what is now New Jersey. They obtained a charter from the
“North Virginia Company,” the Plymouth branch of the Virginia Company,
which controlled from 41 to 45 degrees, giving them permission to
settle in the southern part of North Virginia.

One hundred and two Pilgrims sailed in the Mayflower from Plymouth,
England, in September, 1620. One of the men on board the Mayflower
was Miles Standish, who was to be the soldier-savior of the northern
English colony as John Smith was of the southern one.

Miles Standish was born about 1584 in England; he is said to have been
the heir of a noble English family who was deprived of his rights. He
entered the army and was sent by Queen Elizabeth to help the Dutch in
their war against Spain. He was probably about nineteen or twenty then,
and he seems to have remained in Holland after peace was made, and
there he met the Pilgrims. His portraits represent him as a small man
clad in leathern jacket and high boots, wearing a cartridge belt across
his shoulder. He did not adopt the Pilgrims’ faith or ever become a
member of their church, but he was a brave and faithful comrade.

The voyage was a long and stormy one. During it one member of the
party died and was consigned to an ocean grave. Two months after
leaving England, land was sighted, November 20, 1620. This land was
a point marked Cape James on Captain Smith’s map; the name Cape Cod
was given it later on account of the quantity of codfish caught there
by Gosnold’s men in the expedition of 1602. Cape Cod was farther
north than the Pilgrims had intended to go, and they sailed southward
but were turned back by “dangerous shoals and roaring breakers” and
unfavorable winds.

The men met in the cabin of the Mayflower to discuss the situation. The
shore they were approaching was not the land granted by their charter
and therefore its laws did not apply there. They decided to establish
their colony on the coast and they signed an agreement to obey such
laws as they should make for their guidance. John Carver was chosen
governor.

The Pilgrims made several trips ashore to get wood and water and
to explore the country. Captain Standish led his party of sixteen
soldiers, in warlike array, armed with muskets and swords; they had no
need to use their weapons, as the only Indians they saw fled at their
approach. The chief event of the expedition was finding some corn in a
mound; they carried it to the ship and later, when they were informed
to whom it belonged, they paid the owners for it.

Other expeditions were made along the coast and up the streams in a
shallop, or small boat. Often the spray froze on their clothes and
“made them many times like coats of iron.”

While the Pilgrims tarried on the coast a child was born, son of
William White and they called him Peregrine from a Latin word meaning
“pilgrim.”

After exploring the country for several weeks, the Pilgrims determined
to settle at a place called on Captain Smith’s map Plymouth, which
was the name of the city from which they had sailed. On December 21,
1620, the men landed on the great boulder known as Plymouth Rock.
Their first work was to build a “Common House”; January 31, 1621,
this was completed and the women and children landed. The Pilgrims
were not molested by Indians, but cold and famine were enemies that
almost destroyed them. During the winter most of the colonists were ill
and more than half of the hundred died; of eighteen women, only four
survived the winter. One of those who died was Captain Standish’s wife.

At one time only seven men--one of whom was Captain Standish--were able
to work. These seven, says Bradford their historian, tended the sick,
cooked, washed, and did all the work indoors and outdoors. Rude houses
were built of logs, with thatched roofs and windows of oiled paper. A
church was erected which had cannon on top of it, so that at need it
might serve as a fort.

To keep the Indians from suspecting their weakness, the Pilgrims
leveled the graves and in the spring planted corn over them. On the
whole, the Indians were friendly. One day an Indian approached the
settlement and “saluted us in English and bade us ‘welcome.’” This
was Samoset, “a tall straight man, the hair of his head black, long
behind and short before and no beard. He was naked except for a strip
of leather about his waist, which had a fringe a span long or more. He
had a bow and two arrows, the one bended the other not.” Samoset had
learned broken English from fishermen who came to the coast of Maine.
With him came later Squanto, the only survivor of the tribe which had
lived near Plymouth and which had been destroyed by plague. Squanto
showed the English how to plant corn and to enrich the soil with fish.
Another of the visitors was Massasoit, an Indian chief, who made a
“treaty of friendship” which was kept fifty years.

In April the Mayflower returned to England, but despite the hardships
and sufferings of that terrible winter, not one of the Pilgrims went
back. They were busy making cabins, cultivating gardens and fields,
getting fish and game for food, building up a home in the wilderness.
They traded with the Indians for beaver skins, collected sassafras,
and sent furs and lumber back to England, laboring to repay the money
borrowed to defray their expenses. At first and for several years the
Pilgrims, like the Jamestown settlers, labored together; they prospered
more after the land was divided and each man worked for himself.

They had a prosperous season and good crops and in the fall they
celebrated their harvest and the end of their first year in the new
land by a feast,--the first Thanksgiving. Fish and wild fowl and game
were cooked in the big fireplaces or on wood fires out of doors.
Massasoit came with about ninety men, bringing five deer as his
contribution to the feast. There was a military drill and a shooting
match, and three days were spent in merry-making. Year after year the
Pilgrims observed this festival, and it came at last to be a national
holiday.

The Narragansett Indians were unfriendly and the Pilgrims had to be
on their guard against them. At one time Canonicus, their chief, sent
the settlers a rattlesnake skin filled with arrows as a declaration of
war; it was sent back filled with powder and balls, in token that the
white men were ready to defend themselves. A strong fence, or palisade,
was built around the settlement. In many ways the Pilgrims lived like
soldiers on duty. Sunday morning at beat of drum, people marched to
church. Each man had his weapon near in case of Indian attack.

More than once Indians tried to kill Miles Standish, the brave and
prudent little captain. One gigantic Indian, Pecksuot, ridiculed him
because he was small; in a fight soon after Pecksuot was killed. “I see
you are big enough to lay him on the ground,” said one of the Indians.

About 1623 Captain Standish married a second time, his wife being an
English woman, the sister of his first wife. In “The Courtship of Miles
Standish” Longfellow tells a romance--for so far as we know it had
no foundation in fact--about the fiery little Captain’s unsuccessful
wooing by proxy of a maiden named Priscilla Mullins. The poem gives a
vivid picture of Captain Standish and of life in the New England colony.

In 1625 Captain Standish made a voyage to England on business for
the colony, but he returned in a few months. He subdued the English
settlers at Merrymount who were selling arms to the Indians, and were
living idle, drunken lives.

In eight years the Plymouth colony had grown so that Elder Brewster,
John Alden, and Miles Standish went one summer to Duxbury on the north
side of the bay; Standish made his home there on a high hill called
Captain’s Hill. His sword and musket were now laid aside and he was
busy plowing and tending his farm, settling sites for mills, practicing
his skill in medicine, and serving the public welfare in peaceful ways.
The brave, honorable, helpful man died October 3, 1656, and was buried
at his home on Captain’s Hill. For forty years he had been the leading
spirit in every undertaking requiring courage and military skill.

“For Standish no work was too difficult or dangerous, none too humble
or disagreeable. As captain and magistrate, as engineer and explorer,
as interpreter and merchant, as a tender nurse in pestilence, a
physician at all times, and as the Cincinnatus of his colony, he
showed a wonderful versatility of talent and the highest nobility of
character.”




John Winthrop

A Puritan Governor


After the death of King James, his son Charles became king. Like his
father, he was bent on having his own way; as often happens, his
stubbornness made those opposed to him more stubborn. The people
refused to submit to his dictation, and many of those who differed from
the king in matters of religion and politics came to America, where
a new England was being built up. From 1628 to 1640 there were more
emigrants from England to America than came during the whole of the
century which followed.

In 1628 a company of men secured from the Council of New England
a patent to a tract of land in Massachusetts between the Merrimac
and Charles Rivers and extending from the Atlantic to the Pacific
Ocean which was thought to be near the Hudson River. John Endicott
was sent out that year with a small colony which settled at Salem,
Massachusetts. He was a self-willed, blunt man and tried to regulate
the affairs of the colony according to his ideas. He made laws
against wearing wigs, for instance, and required women to wear veils to
church.

[Illustration: GOVERNOR JOHN WINTHROP]

The first winter was a hard one for the colonists and they were “forced
to lengthen out their own food with acorns.” Like the Pilgrims,
however, the Puritans, whose religious belief was similar to that
of the Pilgrims, held fast their resolution and endured hardship
rather than return to old England where they were not free to worship
according to their own faith.

In March, 1629, a company of prominent and wealthy Puritans secured a
charter from the king, giving them the right to make for their colony
such laws as they pleased provided they were not contrary to the laws
of England. Under this charter six ships came, bringing men, women,
children, cattle, arms, and tools, to establish a Puritan commonwealth.
One of the six ships was the Mayflower which had brought over the
Pilgrims nine years before. The six-weeks voyage seemed “short and
speedy” in those days, and the Puritans landed on a June day when
the land was fair with summer. How unlike the wintry landing of the
Pilgrims! In one year the Salem colony outnumbered the Plymouth colony
which had been established nearly ten years.

The Puritans had obtained a charter from the king, but the question
was would they be able to keep it? The king was as ready to break as
to make a promise, and the Puritan leaders feared that he would call
for and withdraw the much-prized charter. How could they keep it safe?
At last they devised a plan. It was not stipulated where the Company
should meet, so they resolved to move its headquarters and carry the
charter to the New World. The Puritans took good care not to let the
king know of this plan. The members who did not wish to leave England
resigned, and in their places were elected men who were willing to
emigrate to secure civil and religious privileges.

The king was much displeased when he learned that the Massachusetts
Company and its charter had gone across the ocean, but just then
nothing was done about the matter. Later on, an unsuccessful attempt
was made to get the charter from the people.

The governor elected by the Massachusetts company was John Winthrop,
one of the noblest men who aided in the making of New England. Winthrop
was a gentleman by birth, gracious, gentle, and charitable in private
life, intense--and sometimes intolerant--in his religious views. When
he joined the “great emigration” of 1630, he was forty-one years
of age, having been born the very year that the Spanish Armada was
destroyed. With eight hundred men and the precious charter, Winthrop
sailed to the New World. A few days were spent at Salem, and then it
was decided to make a settlement at Charlestown. But the site proved
unfortunate. There was much sickness the first summer, caused, it was
thought, by impure drinking water.

Not far from the little settlement was what was called Shawmut
peninsula; here lived a Mr. Blackstone who had come from England to
lead a hermit’s life. He pitied the sufferings of his neighbors and
countrymen, and invited them to come to Shawmut where the air and water
were excellent. They came and found the situation so favorable that
they bought land from Mr. Blackstone; in September they laid there the
foundations of a city which they called Boston for the English city
of Boston from which many of them came. Shawmut peninsula was called
Trimountain Peninsula from its three hills.

Like the settlers at Plymouth, the Salem colonists were often in want
of food during the first years. Until they could cultivate farms and
raise crops, food had to be brought from England, for there was no
farmers and no tradespeople in the New World from whom it could be
obtained. The loss or delay of a ship bearing supplies meant want
and suffering for the colonists. On one occasion, expected supplies
failed to come to the Puritans and a fast day was appointed to pray for
relief. As Governor Winthrop was dividing his last handful of meal with
a needy neighbor, a ship laden with food entered the harbor. The devout
people went to church to give thanks and changed the appointed fast to
a feast.

Not all the people who had come to Massachusetts were willing to endure
the hardships of the new life. About a hundred went back to England,
but Governor Winthrop, with the more unselfish and zealous Puritans,
remained.

Governor Winthrop endeavored to set the people an example of a sober
and upright life. He became convinced that the drinking of healths
at meals according to the English custom led to intemperance. He
restrained it at his own table and thus became the leader of temperance
reform in the New World.

One winter day he was informed that a poor man who lived near him was
taking fuel from his woodpile. “Go call that man to me,” he said, “I’ll
warrant I’ll cure him of stealing.” When the man came he said, “Friend,
it is a severe winter and I doubt you are but meanly provided with
wood; wherefore I would have you supply yourself at my woodpile till
this cold season be over.” He then asked his friends whether he had not
cured this man of stealing his wood.

Winthrop’s charity, however, did not extend to matters of religion.
He wished to have those of unlike religious views “well whipt.” The
Puritans had come to America to establish a colony which should be
ruled according to their own views and faith. They did not tolerate in
it men who differed from them in belief. “Let such go elsewhere,” they
thought; “there is room enough.”

The Puritan leaders of the Massachusetts Company encouraged colonists
of their own faith to emigrate. By 1634 four thousand had come and
about twenty villages had been founded on or near the bay. Houses,
churches, and shops were built; farms were tilled; fur, lumber, and
salt fish were sent to England and manufactured goods were brought back.

The laws of the Massachusetts colony were very strict. People were
taxed to support the church, and only men who were church members were
allowed to vote or to hold office as magistrates. Everyone was required
to attend church services. If any one was absent without good reason
the “tithing man” was sent after him. In church men sat on one side
and women on the other; there was a man to keep order and he had a
long stick with which to tap people who slept or children who fidgeted
during the service which lasted two, or three, or even four hours.
Children were whipped and grown people were fined if they talked in
church.

A young clergyman of Salem, Roger Williams, of whom you will hear more
later, thought that these laws were too strict. He thought people ought
to enjoy civil and religious liberty, but Governor Winthrop advised him
to leave the colony as no one with such views was wanted there.

Governor Winthrop spent much of his fortune in helping the colony he
had founded and had the joy of seeing it grow and prosper. He died
March 26, 1649.

In 1692 the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay Colonies were united under
the name of Massachusetts, and thus was founded the colony which in
time became the state of Massachusetts.




Roger Williams

An Advocate of Religious Liberty


You have learned that the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay colonists
came to America to found colonies governed according to their own
views. This was because they were convinced these views were right, not
because they believed that every man should be free to worship as he
pleased. Liberty of faith and worship, they thought, would destroy all
law and order.

Roger Williams, however, believed in civil freedom and religious
liberty. He was a clever young Welshman who had been educated as a
clergyman and had adopted Baptist views. He and his wife came from
England to America in 1631. For a while he was pastor of a church in
Boston, but his views were so different from those of his congregation
that he did not stay there long. He went to Salem, then to Plymouth,
and then back to Salem. He had much influence and won many people to
his views. The Massachusetts Bay Puritans began to dislike him and to
fear his influence; there were long debates and discussions as to what
should be done about him. They objected to both his political and his
religious beliefs.

Roger Williams thought that the laws of a country should prevent and
punish crime and should not direct religious matters; these, he urged,
should be left to men’s own consciences. He said that every man should
be free to believe what he chose, and that it was wrong to tax people
to support a certain church or to compel them to attend it. He said
that every man ought to be allowed to vote, and that for magistrates
sensible, upright men ought to be chosen without regard to their
church membership. These things were contrary to the belief of the
Massachusetts Bay colony and to its practices.

Williams said, moreover, that the king of England had no right to grant
lands in America to any one; these belonged to the Indians and should
be secured from them. This assertion was regarded as a defiance of the
king’s authority. Finally it was resolved to send Williams away from
the colony, and in January, 1636, the General Court ordered him to come
to Boston to get on a ship that was about to sail to England. Williams
knew well that return to England meant imprisonment or punishment for
his views. Instead of going to Boston, he left his home in Salem one
bleak, snowy day and took refuge in the forest. From his first coming
to the colony he had made friends with the Indians. Now he made his
way to the wigwam of Massasoit, where he spent the winter, trying to
teach the savages the truths of the Christian religion. For weeks he
was “sorely tost in a bitter season, not knowing what bread or bed did
mean.”

He then settled on Seekonk River and planted corn, thinking that he was
beyond the bounds of the Plymouth colony. But he was still within its
limits; in the spring Governor Winthrop informed him that he would be
let alone if he would “steer his course” to Narragansett Bay.

With a few companions who had adopted his views, Williams crossed the
bay in an Indian canoe, made a covenant of peace with the natives, and
established a settlement which he called Providence. This colony became
a place of refuge for people oppressed on account of their religious
views. “I desired it might be a shelter for persons distressed
for conscience,” said Williams. It was to be free to “Baptists,
Protestants, Jews, or Turks,” he said, “to all men of all nations and
countries.”

Among the people who took refuge there was Mrs. Anne Hutchinson. She
was a woman preacher, claiming to have the spirit of prophecy, who had
been driven out from the Massachusetts colony. After some peaceful
years in Rhode Island, she moved westward to a settlement of her own.
Here she, her children, and servants were murdered by Indians.

Roger Williams refused to persecute Quakers who were very unpopular
in all the other colonies. The religious liberty enjoyed in this
colony seems to us to-day, when it is the general custom, entirely
right and reasonable, but it seemed very strange and unreasonable to
people at that time. Among the people of different religious views who
took refuge in Rhode Island, there was a great deal of arguing and
quarreling. It was said “any man who had lost his religion would be
sure to find it again at some village in Rhode Island.”

In 1643, Williams went to England and secured a charter for his colony.
It was called “Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,” and it is to
be remembered as the first colony which by its laws secured entire
religious toleration. The Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth Colonies so
disapproved of the principles on which it was founded that they would
not unite with it in joint action. But the Rhode Island colony was
a great safeguard and protection to them. It was the influence and
friendship of Roger Williams which kept the fierce Narragansetts from
taking up arms against the white men at a time when it would have been
dangerous and perhaps fatal to the struggling young colonies.

The exact date of Roger Williams’ death is uncertain. He is said to
have lived to the age of eighty-four, devoting himself to the interests
of his colony, which he lived to see prosperous and flourishing.




Henry Hudson


As time passed, people became convinced that the land which Columbus
had reached was not the shore of Asia as they had at first thought.
For more than a hundred years, however, they thought that it was only
a narrow body of land and that a passage, or many passages, would be
found connecting the Atlantic with the ocean to the west and opening a
direct route to India. It was not strange that they held this theory.
The early explorers had reached the land at its narrowest part and
beheld from the Isthmus of Panama the great western ocean. They did not
know that the unexplored land broadened into great continents to the
north and south.

As years passed, people became more and more anxious to find a short
passage to India. The Turks controlled and blocked the overland passage
to Asia. The ocean route by way of Africa was long and roundabout;
for the Dutch this had also the disadvantage of making it necessary
for their ships to pass and repass their enemy Spain and their
trade-rival Portugal. The Dutch had, by long and desperate fighting,
freed themselves from Spanish control and they had become the great
sea-traders of the world.

In the beginning of the seventeenth century they had about three
thousand vessels on the seas--more than all the rest of Europe
combined. Most of these were under control of the Dutch East India
Company, the largest and richest trading association in the world. They
traveled the long ocean route south of Africa and brought back tea,
coffee, spices, silks, and dye-woods from Asia. If only they could find
a direct way to Asia how their profits would be increased! Early in the
seventeenth century they heard of a sailor in England who had been to
seek this direct route and they engaged him to make a voyage for them.
This sailor was Henry Hudson.

When and where he was born and what were the events of his early life,
we do not know. He was an Englishman by birth, a brave, energetic man
by nature, a navigator by profession. We first hear of him in 1607,
four days before he started on a voyage for some London merchants, to
seek a northeast passage to India. He had a small vessel with only ten
men, besides himself and his little son John who accompanied him on
all his voyages. Hudson left London in April, 1607. He sailed along
the coast of Greenland and was at last turned back by the ice barrier
between Greenland and Spitzbergen. He made two interesting observations
in these unknown seas--first, the changing color of the sea near
Spitzbergen,--green, blue, dark, transparent,--second, the great number
of whales which afterwards were the source of a profitable industry.
Unable to carry out his purpose, he returned to England after an
absence of four and a half months.

In April of the next year, 1608, the London merchants sent him out
again to seek the northeast passage. He reached Spitzbergen and Nova
Zembla and vainly endeavored to find a passage through the ice; in
August he returned from his unsuccessful voyage. The London merchants
now gave up the scheme--at least for the time.

But the Dutch heard of Hudson and asked him to make a voyage for them.
He agreed to undertake for the Dutch East India Company a third voyage
in search of a northeast passage to India. He set out in April, 1609,
with two vessels, the Half Moon and the Good Hope, and a crew of about
twenty men, some Dutch, some English. As before he sailed to the
northeast, and as before his passage was blocked by ice. The Good Hope
returned to Amsterdam, it is supposed, after a mutiny near Nova Zembla.

But Hudson and the Half Moon did not return. Having for the third time
failed to find the northeast passage he sought, he resolved to look
for one to the northwest. This was probably suggested to him by a
letter and maps which his friend Captain John Smith had sent him. Smith
expressed the opinion that north of the English colony, Virginia, there
was a sea which led into the Western Ocean. Sailing past Greenland,
Newfoundland, and Cape Cod, Hudson reached the coast of Virginia, and
entered the Delaware River.

Turning northward he kept near the shore till he observed an opening
in the land, New York Bay, which he entered. This bay had been entered
before. Verrazano, an Italian sailor in command of a French ship, had
sailed in and out of it. French vessels had afterwards traded there,
but had made no settlements.

Into this bay emptied a river which Hudson thought might connect the
eastern and the western ocean; up this river he sailed about a hundred
and fifty miles, as far as the present site of Albany; then he turned
back, being convinced that the stream did not afford the passage he
sought. He spent a month exploring this river, to which his name was
given. The land was “pleasant with grass and flowers and goodly trees.”
It was, he said, “good ground for corn and other garden herbs, with
great store of goodly oaks.” The natives, he said, were a “sensible
and warlike people.” He carried on trade with the Indians who brought
tobacco, maize, beans, grapes, pumpkins, and skins, to exchange for
knives, beads, and trinkets. There arose disputes and in a fight one
white man and several Indians were killed.

On Hudson’s way back to Holland, he stopped in England to leave some
English sailors; there he was detained, being ordered by the English
government to “stay and serve his own country.” His charts and records
were delivered to the Dutch who laid claim to the country he had found,
calling the Delaware the “South River,” and the Hudson the “Great
North River,” and the country between “New Netherlands.”

In April, 1610, Hudson sailed on his fourth and last voyage, to seek
for English merchants the northwest passage. His little vessel the
Discovery entered the strait and bay which bear his name, and he spent
three months exploring the coast. In November the vessel was frozen
in and the crew spent the winter on the northern sea, suffering from
scarcity of food as well as from the severe climate. When summer came,
Hudson wished to continue his search. He believed that men should, to
use his own words, resolve “To achieve what they have undertaken, or
else to give reason wherefore it will not be.”

His crew wished to return home and mutinied against him. One midsummer
day, they seized him, his son, and seven loyal seamen, and set them
adrift in a boat. The little craft floated off on the summer sea and
nothing more was ever heard of it or of a soul on board. An old Dutch
legend says that Hudson and his men came safe to shore and made their
home in the fair land he had discovered. Years later, when thunder
rumbled in the heights along the Hudson River, the old Dutch folks
would shake their heads and say, “Hendrik Hudson and his crew are
playing ninepins.”




Peter Minuit


A Dutch West India Company was organized on the same plan as the
rich and powerful Dutch East India Company. The western company was
to trade on the coast of Africa and of America from Newfoundland
to Magellan. For convenience in this trade, forts and posts were
established where agents were stationed to carry on trade and collect
furs. A fort and trading-post was established on Manhattan Island.
There was gradually built up a village; this became a town and finally
grew to be a city. At first it was called New Amsterdam; now it is the
wealthy and populous city of New York.

The first directors who were sent to New Amsterdam by the Dutch Company
lacked either ability or character to govern the settlement well. At
last, however, the Company found the right man for the place. This
was Peter Minuit. He was not a Dutchman. He was French by descent and
German by birth; his early manhood had been spent in Germany.

He was appointed director of the council of New Amsterdam and came to
Manhattan in May, 1626. His ship brought seeds, plants, and tools,
for he realized that on agriculture as well as on commerce depended
the success of the colony. He wished to establish it on a foundation
of justice. His first act was to summon the Indian chiefs of the
neighborhood and to buy from them the island of Manhattan. Gay-colored
cloth, beads, knives, and hatchets were displayed, and for goods to the
value of twenty-four dollars the Dutch bought the island of Manhattan
and bought also the good will of the Iroquois. Thus the settlement
was spared, for the most part, the horrors of Indian warfare which
wasted most of the other colonies. Before Penn came to America, the
Dutch leader, Minuit, treated the Indians in fair and humane fashion.
We are not to think that the Indians were defrauded by the small sum
paid for Manhattan. To them it was a mere hands-breadth of their vast
possessions, a place to hunt deer and turkey and build wigwams and till
cornfields.

Minuit tried to establish friendly relations with the English colonies
north of him and sent courteous letters and presents of sugar and Dutch
cheese to Governor Bradford of Plymouth.

Minuit looked after the welfare of the colony and also after the
interests of the Company. A flourishing fur trade was carried on with
the Indians; a large vessel was built and sent to Holland loaded with
furs--beaver, otter, mink, and bear--and with oak and hickory timber.
Furs were the money of this settlement, as tobacco was of Virginia, and
they were used in the payment of salaries and debts. The Indian money,
wampum, was also used in the commerce of the colonies, six pieces of
wampum being equal to one stiver, a small Dutch coin worth about two
cents. Bouweries, or farms, occupied the meadows along East River;
grain was grown, and sheep, cattle, and hogs were raised. The thrifty
Dutch people lived in comfort and plenty.

The colony prospered under Minuit’s management, but his rule came
to an end on account of trouble with the “patroons.” These patroons
were large land-owners along the Hudson. In order to get the colony
settled, the Dutch Company granted land fronting sixteen miles on the
river and extending back to the Atlantic or to the Pacific to persons
who would establish settlements of at least fifty persons within four
years. These patroons had almost absolute power over the settlers on
their land; the only restrictions on their privileges and trade were
that they were forbidden to make cloth, in order to protect Dutch
manufacturers, or to trade in furs, which was the especial privilege of
the Company.

The patroons, however, encroached on the Company’s fur trade, and Peter
Minuit excited their enmity by endeavoring to protect the rights of the
Company which he represented. On the other hand, the Company thought
that he did not check and control the patroons as he should. Between
the two he was recalled. He returned to Holland in the spring of 1632,
having really established the colony of New Amsterdam which he governed
for six years.

Failing to get his wrongs redressed by the Dutch West India Company,
Minuit offered his services to Sweden to establish a colony in the
New World. This plan had already been suggested by William Usselinx,
a Dutch merchant who had projected the Dutch West India Company in
1621. Minuit carried out the plan. He and his friends in Holland bore
half the expense of fitting out an expedition to found a Swedish-Dutch
Company.

Owing to Minuit’s illness, the vessels did not sail till late in 1637.
They reached the shores of the Delaware in March, 1638, and took
possession of the west bank of the river. Minuit had little regard
for the claims of territory made by nations whose wandering ships
had touched the coast and sailed away again. In his opinion the land
belonged to those who purchased it from the Indian inhabitants and
settled there and cultivated the soil. As at Manhattan, he met the
Indian chiefs and formed a treaty never broken by either party. The
Indians of Delaware, like those farther north, belonged to the great
Iroquois Confederacy or Five Nations.

Minuit took possession of the country in the name of the young queen of
Sweden and built a fort called Christina in her honor. He cultivated
friendly relations with the English at Jamestown and with the Dutch
trading-posts on the east bank of the Delaware. A thriving fur trade
was established with the friendly Indians and soon the Dutch West India
Company complained that their trade was greatly injured by Minuit’s
colony. The governor of New Netherlands wrote a letter of protest
against the Swedes occupying this land, but during the three years
that Minuit remained in charge the Dutch confined their protests to
words.

After doing his utmost to establish the colony in peace, strength, and
safety, Minuit left it on a trading expedition. He sailed to the West
Indies to barter for tobacco to carry back to Old Sweden. While he was
guest on a Dutch vessel in the harbor a violent hurricane came up, the
ship was driven to sea and was never heard of more. Thus perished the
first governor of New Sweden, the real founder of New Amsterdam.




Peter Stuyvesant

The Last Dutch Governor of New York


Van Twiller succeeded Minuit as governor of the New Netherlands. He
proved incompetent and was replaced by Kieft, who by cruelty and
injustice provoked the Indians to war. Kieft so mismanaged affairs that
in three years the population of the New Netherlands was reduced from
three thousand to one thousand.

In 1647 Peter Stuyvesant was appointed governor. He was the son of a
Dutch clergyman, but, being fond of fighting and adventure, he had
chosen war as his profession. He took part in several of the battles by
which the Dutch gained mastery over the Spaniards at sea. At one time
he undertook to conquer the Spanish island of St. Martin and lost a leg
in the fight. He was called “Old Silver Leg,” because his lost limb
had been replaced by a wooden stump, ornamented with bands of silver.
He was also called “Headstrong Peter,” a title which he well deserved.

[Illustration: PETER STUYVESANT]

The Dutch West India Company thought that this brave, fearless soldier
would be the very man to control their troublesome colony on the
Hudson. So he was appointed and came to the colony in May, 1647, with a
fleet of four vessels. He told the people, “I shall be in my government
as a father over his children”--a very severe and stern parent he
proved.

A strong man was needed to save the colony from ruin. Enemies
threatened it on all sides.

In the first place, there were the Indians whom Kieft had provoked to
war. Stuyvesant stopped the sale of intoxicating liquors to them; while
stern, he was so just and honest and fearless that he won their respect
and they made and kept peace with him.

In the second place, the encroachments of the New Englanders were a
constant source of annoyance. The Dutch claimed all the land between
the Connecticut and Hudson Rivers by right of Hudson’s discoveries,
and valued it as a field for fur trade. “The land is too good to stand
idle,” said the English, and occupied it with their farms and villages.
The Dutch protested and asserted their claims, but in vain. The English
farmers continued to occupy the land, and more and more came in
conflict with the Dutch.

Stuyvesant decided that a fixed line--even one which yielded some
territory claimed by the Dutch--was better than an unfixed one
constantly advanced by the English. In 1650, therefore, he made an
agreement, surrendering the land already held by the English--which the
Dutch could not have regained--and establishing a fixed line beyond
which the English agreed not to advance. Stuyvesant acted wisely in the
matter, but the West India Company was dissatisfied, thinking that he
ought not to have surrendered the Dutch claims.

In 1652 New Amsterdam was granted a charter as a city. It had then
about three hundred houses and fifteen hundred inhabitants. The city
was to have a council, but, instead of allowing the people to elect the
members, Stuyvesant appointed them and he presided at all meetings of
importance. The sturdy Dutchman was resolved that his will should be
the law of the colony. The people assembled in convention and asked,
among other things, that they might appoint local officers. Stuyvesant
ordered them to disperse, informing them “his authority was from the
West India Company and from God and not from ignorant subjects.”

In the course of time there arose trouble between the Dutch colonists
and the Swedes who had settled along the Delaware on land claimed by
the Dutch. Finally, a Swedish captain took possession of a Dutch fort.
Stuyvesant, with a force of six or seven hundred men and seventeen
ships, set forth to uphold his country’s rights. He went to the
Delaware, or South River, retook the forts, and compelled the Swedes to
swear allegiance to the Netherlands. A Dutch garrison was put in charge
of the fort and thus ended Swedish rule on the Delaware.

While absent on this expedition, Stuyvesant received evil tidings from
Manhattan. An Indian woman had been killed by a Dutchman for stealing
peaches from his garden. To revenge this injury, the Indians during the
absence of the fighting men on the Delaware attacked and burned the
settlement, killed some of the hated whites, and carried off others
as prisoners. Stuyvesant made ready to march against the Indians, but
did not do so as they requested terms of peace and returned their
prisoners. Later, the Indians made another attack and Stuyvesant
promptly punished them by force of arms.

Under the just, firm rule of the despotic, high-tempered governor, the
colony of New Netherlands flourished. Farms were cleared and tended,
villages were formed, trade flourished, and immigration increased. But
the end of Dutch rule on the Hudson was at hand. In 1664 Charles II.,
king of England, granted to his brother James, Duke of York, the entire
territory claimed and occupied by the Dutch, which he asserted belonged
to England. England and Holland were then at peace, but the Duke of
York did not hesitate to bring on war. He fitted out four war-ships
with four hundred and fifty soldiers and sent them to America under
command of Colonel Nicolls. The Dutch were informed that the vessels
were going to the colonies in New England. Instead, they sailed to New
Amsterdam. Stuyvesant had neither powder nor provisions for a siege,
and his soldiers wished to accept English terms. Nicolls informed the
council that none of the people’s rights would be interfered with--only
the flag and the governor would be changed. Brave sturdy old Stuyvesant
tore up the letter offering these terms and wished to fight for the
rights of the Company he represented. But the council, soldiers, and
citizens would not support him, and he had to yield.

“I had rather be carried to my grave,” he said, as he ordered the
surrender.

He went to Holland to prove that he had done his best to uphold the
Company’s rights. Having done this, he returned to his home in the
New World. He led a quiet, comfortable life in his fine old country
home--in what is now the business heart of New York City,--and in the
course of time, he and Governor Nicolls became great friends.

The Dutch resented the English seizure of their colony and declared war
against England. When peace was made, it was agreed that each nation
should keep what it had won. Holland had won the most victories and so
gained most territory by this agreement; but the city of New Amsterdam
and the colony of New Netherlands--both of which were called New York
in honor of their new ruler--remained in English hands. The Dutch
inhabitants were secured in their rights and privileges, according to
Colonel Nicolls’ promise, and they went on their sober, hard-working
way. From them the English, in time, borrowed many Dutch customs and
festivals,--such as that of having Easter eggs and of celebrating
Christmas with the visit of St. Nicholas or Santa Claus.




Samuel de Champlain

The Father of New France


For years the Portuguese and the Spanish shared between them the
trading-posts and commerce of the world. Portugal controlled the
ocean route to Asia, and Spain by virtue of her early discoveries and
explorations laid claim to the whole of the New World. But as time
passed this state of affairs was changed. In the Old World, the Dutch
became the successful rivals of the Portuguese; in the New, Spain had
to contend with France, England, Holland, and Sweden, all of which were
seeking a share of the prize.

For a long time France was the chief rival with which Spain had to
reckon. Verrazano, a Florentine sailor, was sent from France in command
of four vessels to seek the longed-for westward route to Cathay. Left
at last with one ship, he reached in 1524 the coast of North Carolina,
“a new land never before seen of any man, ancient or modern,”--for in
the opinion of the Europeans the natives counted not at all. Verrazano
sailed along the coast, into the Bay of New York and out again, and
along the coast of New England to Newfoundland. Provisions giving out,
he returned to France and gave the first description of the coast of
the United States.

In the wake of Verrazano, followed other Frenchmen. One of these was
Jacques Cartier. In 1534 he came to the coast of Newfoundland and
sailed up the St. Lawrence River, hoping to find through it an outlet
to Cathay. On a second voyage, he entered and named the Bay of St.
Lawrence and ascended the great river as far as Montreal. A third
voyage he made in 1541, for the purpose of establishing a colony.
But a severe winter and much sickness and suffering discouraged the
colonists, and the next year they left New France for Old.

Years passed. Civil and religious wars laid France waste, and many
earnest men began to look to the New World for an asylum from the Old.
A band of French Protestants led by John Ribaut left their native
shores to make their home in America. Instead of sailing northward,
they landed in 1562 on the shores of Florida, which was the territory
of Catholic Spain. The colony was attacked by the Spaniards under
Menendez, and men, women, and children were killed. This terrible
slaughter was avenged by the French under De Gourges, but the tide of
French colonization was turned from the southern coast.

Five years after this massacre, there was born Samuel de Champlain, who
won the title of the “Father of New France.” His father was a French
ship captain; he himself was trained in the art of navigation and
became a captain in the royal navy. “Navigation is the art which has
powerfully attracted me ever since my boyhood and has led me to expose
myself almost all my life to the impetuous bufferings of the sea,” he
said.

Chaplain served awhile in the army; when peace came his adventurous
spirit led him to the West Indies. This was Spanish territory and the
Frenchman went thither at the risk of his life. He spent two years
in America. To him it seemed, as it had seemed to some Spanish and
Portuguese officials, that it would be a good plan to cut a canal
through the Isthmus of Panama. Champlain wrote, “If the four leagues
of land which there are from Panama to the (Chagres) river were cut
through, one might pass from the south sea to the ocean on the other
side and thus shorten the route by more than fifteen hundred leagues;
and from Panama to the Strait of Magellan would be an island and from
Panama to the New-found lands would be another island, so that the
whole of America would be in two islands.”

Always on his voyages Champlain kept a diary and made maps of the lands
he visited. When he returned to France, he gave the king a minute
account of the colonies and treasure of Spain. It was shame to France,
he thought, that on the New World, discovered more than a century
before, only their enemies had a foothold.

A French nobleman who was planning to found a colony in America decided
that this enterprising young sailor-soldier would be the man to lead
the undertaking. Champlain entered into the plan with enthusiasm. In
1603 he set out to reconnoiter the new land, following the route of
Cartier. He sailed up the St. Lawrence River, to the present site of
Montreal. During the next four years he made five voyages to the New
World, exploring the coast from New England northward. He led a band of
colonists who after a winter of hardship and sickness returned in 1607
to France. But Champlain was not discouraged. He was resolved to extend
the power of France and of the Catholic religion in the new land, to
penetrate the unknown wilds, and to seek a route to the East. He was
appointed Lieutenant-governor of the French colony, an office which
he held until his death, and came to America in 1608 to establish a
settlement on the St. Lawrence River. In July the colonists landed and
erected a store-house, the beginning of the city of Quebec.

Five discontented men in the party formed a plot to kill Champlain
and turn the fortress over to the Spaniards. One of the men, however,
betrayed the plot; the conspirators were arrested, the ringleader
was hanged, and the others were sent prisoners to France. The winter
of 1609 found the French colony one of three in the New World. At
Jamestown, in Virginia, were the English; at St. Augustine, in Florida,
were the Spaniards; and far to the north at Quebec in Canada, were
the French. No one could then guess which nation would finally become
supreme, though the chances seemed in favor of the Spaniards.

The first winter at Quebec was one of hardship and sickness, and when
spring opened only eight of the twenty-eight Frenchmen were alive. In
1609 Champlain, ever ready for adventure, accompanied some Algonquins
and other Indians on an expedition against their enemies the Iroquois,
the Five Nations. He wished to see “a large lake, filled with beautiful
islands, and with a fine country surrounding it” of which he had
been told. He reached the beautiful lake, which now bears his name;
on its banks his firearms turned the battle against the Iroquois and
begun the long warfare in which the French were opposed to this great
confederation of tribes. The very day that Champlain brought on his
nation the enmity of this deadly foe, a little Dutch vessel, the Half
Moon, was anchored on the New England coast. A few weeks later it
entered the Hudson River,--bearing a crew of English and Dutch--the two
peoples who were to be allies of the foe which the Frenchmen made that
day and to turn the tide of battle against France.

From 1609 till his death, the time of Champlain was divided between
New and Old France. Exploring, fighting, establishing trading-posts,
he was busy building up the young colony and developing its resources.
In 1620 his young wife, whom he had married ten years before when she
was a mere child, came for the first time to Quebec. After four years
of hardship, she returned to France and did not again revisit the New
World.

The French colony grew and prospered. It was on friendly terms with
its Indian neighbors with whom it carried on a flourishing fur trade.
Furs were the currency and wealth of the French colony, as of the
Dutch colony on Manhattan. The French exported every year to France
from fifteen to twenty thousand skins; the Dutch at Manhattan thought
business good when they shipped four thousand.

In 1628 the French colony was reduced to sore straits from scarcity
of food. This was increased by the English capture of the ships
bringing supplies. Winter passed and with spring the suffering
increased. “We ate our peas by count,” says Champlain. His heart was
wrung by the sufferings of the people, especially of the women and
children. “Nevertheless,” he says, “I was patient, having always good
courage,--and can say with truth that I aided every one to the utmost
that was in my power.” In this extremity in 1629 Quebec was attacked by
English war-ships and was forced to surrender.

Champlain was detained awhile as prisoner in England. Afterwards New
France was by treaty restored to France and Champlain returned to
Quebec where he died Christmas Day, 1635. “Of the pioneers of the North
American forests his name stands foremost on the lists,” says Parkman.




Robert de la Salle

The Explorer of the Mississippi River


The Spanish adventurer, De Soto, in his march westward in 1541, was
the first white man who reached the Mississippi River. Year after year
passed and the Spaniards did not occupy the land along its shores.
Instead, they settled the islands and shores to the south and sought
silver and gold in Mexico and Peru. While the Spaniards were occupying
southern regions, the French were taking possession of northern lands,
penetrating inland along the St. Lawrence River.

The French traders and missionaries who went westward heard stories of
a mighty river not far distant, which flowed to the sea. In the spring
of 1673 two Frenchmen set out in birch canoes to find and explore this
river, hoping thus to reach the Pacific Ocean. These Frenchmen were
Louis Joliet, an explorer in search of the passage to the Pacific, and
Father Marquette, a priest familiar with Indian dialects, who wished
to reach the savages of the wilderness. Joliet and Marquette went up
the St. Lawrence and through the Great Lakes. They were guided by two
Indian boys to the Wisconsin River down which they floated in their
canoes. After several days the explorers landed at a settlement of the
friendly Indian tribe, the Illinois. The peace pipe was smoked and a
banquet was served of Indian meal made into mush, boiled fish, baked
dog, and buffalo meat. Again embarking, the adventurers sailed on till
they reached the place where the Missouri empties into the Mississippi.

The Indian guides informed them that they could ascend the river and
going westward reach a prairie across which their canoes could be
carried; then they could embark on a river which flowed southwest into
a lake; from this issued a river which flowed into the western sea. The
Frenchmen did not follow the course thus pointed out and it was many
years before the truth of the statement was verified. But if you look
on a map you see the Missouri can be ascended to the Platte River, the
source of which is near the Colorado River which flows into the Gulf of
California.

The Frenchmen sailed down the Mississippi as far as the mouth of the
Arkansas River. They were convinced that the stream entered the Gulf of
Mexico and they did not care to encounter the hostile Spaniards or the
warlike Indian tribes which they were told dwelt on the banks of the
lower Mississippi. So they turned back, going up the Illinois River and
passing the marshy prairie which is now the site of the great city of
Chicago. After a journey of more than twenty-five hundred miles, they
reached in September the mission at Green Bay.

Robert de la Salle, a gentleman of Normandy, was in Canada when
Marquette and Joliet returned from their voyage. He was much interested
in their discoveries and he determined to go from the St. Lawrence to
the mouth of the Mississippi. He wished to take possession of the land
in the name of the king of France to whom it was considered that the
whole valley of the great river belonged by virtue of the discoveries
of Marquette and Joliet; he wished also to establish military and
trading posts along the lakes and the river; he hoped that he would
find a passage to the Pacific Ocean. The king gave his consent and aid
to the plan.

La Salle established a fort on Lake Ontario. Not far from Niagara
Falls, he built a vessel which he called the Griffin. This sailed
through Lakes Erie and Huron and Michigan and then was sent back richly
laden with furs. Unfortunately, it was wrecked on the return voyage
with all on board. In the winter of 1680, La Salle returned to the fort
on Lake Ontario to get supplies. In August, 1680, La Salle’s party,
consisting of twenty-three Frenchmen and thirty-one Indians, set out in
birch canoes to explore the Mississippi. Delayed by storms and tempests
and Indian wars, the voyagers did not reach the mouth of the Chicago
River until January, 1682. The canoes were dragged on sledges down the
frozen Chicago River. When they reached the Mississippi, they were
detained by the masses of ice on its waters.

As soon as possible the Frenchmen embarked and sailed down the river,
stopping to get corn and information from Indian tribes on their way
and to give religious instruction. They slept in the wigwams of the
savages and won their hearts by just and kind treatment.

They sailed down the mighty river till they came in sight of the open
sea. On the ninth of April, 1682, La Salle in the name of King Louis
of France took possession of the land which he called Louisiana. The
French flag was raised over the valley of the Mississippi--a territory
three times as large as France. The return voyage was made in safety,
though it was delayed by hostile Indians, want of food and the illness
of La Salle. He did not reach Quebec till the autumn of 1683.

He sailed for France that winter to organize a colony for settling the
southern country discovered by him. The king entered eagerly into the
plan and La Salle was sent with four vessels bearing men and supplies
to establish a colony. Ignorant of the coast, the captain went too far
west and reached Matagorda Bay in Texas early in the spring of 1685. La
Salle wished to seek the mouth of the river, but the captain, impatient
to return, landed the stores and sailed away. La Salle made the best of
matters and finding the climate pleasant and the Indians friendly, he
established a colony there.

Month after month passed, and no supplies were received from France.
Therefore he set out, January, 1687, with twenty men to find the
Mississippi River and make his way to Canada. There he hoped to get
supplies and send letters to France requesting aid for the colony. On
the journey some men rebelled against his authority, killed his nephew
and a faithful Indian, and later shot La Salle himself. “Thus died our
wise commander, constant in adversity, intrepid, generous, engaging,
dexterous, skillful, capable of everything.... He died in the prime
of life, in the midst of his enterprises, without having seen their
success.” He had laid the foundation of French power in the Mississippi
valley, and had established it upon a basis of friendship with the
natives, which made possible its growth in peace and security.




Lords Baltimore of Baltimore


An interesting figure in the Stuart court was that of the first Lord
Baltimore, the Catholic nobleman through whose interest and influence
the colony of Maryland was established. George Calvert--he was not yet
Lord Baltimore--entered public life as the secretary of Sir Robert
Cecil; he won the favor of King James I. and in 1619 he was knighted
and made secretary of state. So far from seeking office, we are
informed that “he disabled himself various ways, but specially that he
thought himself unworthy to sit in that place so lately possessed by
his noble lord and master.”

A few years later he openly connected himself with the Catholics
and resigned his office. He did not, however, lose favor with the
Protestant king who granted him the title of Baron Baltimore of
Baltimore, and confirmed his claim to large estates in Ireland. But
George Calvert’s interest lay in another direction and the remainder
of his life was given to “that ancient, primitive, and heroic work of
planting the world.”

As early as 1609 he had been a member of the Virginia Company and his
position as secretary of state made him intimately acquainted with
the course of exploration and colonization in the New World. At that
time Catholics in England were not allowed liberty of worship. Calvert
desired to establish a colony where men, especially those of his
own faith, might enjoy the free exercise of their religion. In 1620
he purchased a plantation in Newfoundland and the next year he sent
colonists with tools and supplies to found a settlement, which he named
Avalon. “Westward Hoe for Avalon,” by Captain Whitbourne, published
the next year, described in glowing terms the country with its good
fisheries, abundant berries, cherries, and pears, and “red and white
damask roses.” In 1623 the king granted a charter giving Lord Baltimore
practically royal authority over the province. As a sign of sovereign
power, the king of England was to receive a white horse whenever he
visited Avalon.

In 1627 Lord Baltimore for the first time crossed the ocean to the
province so eloquently described by Whitbourne. He found--a stormy
sea beating against a rough peninsula which was broken by stretches
of barren sand, tracts of marshes, hills clothed with stunted,
cone-bearing trees, and narrow spaces of arable land. Desolate as it
was, Lord Baltimore saw Avalon at its best, for it was summer.

In a few weeks he went back to England and the next year he returned to
Avalon with his wife and all his family except his eldest son Cecilius
or Cecil. The hardships of the long, severe winter and the contests
with the French convinced Lord Baltimore that the northern province was
no place for his colony--the twenty thousand pounds he had spent on it
were wasted. He wrote to the king, complaining that “from the middle
of October to the middle of May there is a sad fare of winter upon all
this land,” and requesting a grant of land in a more genial climate,
to which he might remove his colony of forty-six persons. At first he
endeavored to obtain territory south of Virginia, but this was opposed
by the Virginia Company which claimed the land and said it was about to
send colonists thither. Finally it was decided that it would be well to
establish an English colony north of Virginia to keep back the Dutch
and the French who were settling territory claimed by England. Lord
Baltimore received a grant of land on Chesapeake Bay, extending to the
Potomac. But this land he was never to settle or even to see. He died
in April, 1632. The grant thus devolved on his son Cecil, a young man
of twenty-eight, who carried out the plans so dear to his father.

Cecil, who was the real founder of Maryland, never visited the colony;
he sent out settlers and supplies under his younger brother, Leonard.
Leonard was the first governor of Maryland, as the land was called in
honor of the English queen, Henrietta Maria. The charter given Lord
Baltimore granted more absolute power than was ever bestowed on any
other English colonist in the New World. “Cecilius, Absolute Lord of
Maryland and Avalon,” could make peace or war; he had the law-making
power also and the people could merely advise and assent or dissent.
The only tribute required was the yearly payment of two Indian arrows
to the king and of one-fifth of all the gold and silver found in the
land. As soon as the settlers landed, Leonard Calvert established
friendly relations with the Indians whom the Englishmen found to “have
generous natures and requite any kindness shown them.” The peaceful
relations with these Indians, called “Friend Indians” in later
treaties, were never broken.

Sailing up St. Mary’s River, the colonists found a place which pleased
them as a site for a settlement. They purchased it from the Indians
for “axes, hoes, and cloth.” Here St. Mary’s was built in 1634, on the
former site of an Indian village.

From the first the policy of the Maryland colony was “peace, unity, and
religious toleration.” Until it was established, there was no place in
the English colonies in America where Catholics had religious liberty.
In the colony on the Potomac, the Catholics enjoyed the free exercise
of their religion and granted to others the same privilege. This
religious toleration was secured by law in 1649. It was agreed that “no
persons professing to believe in Jesus Christ should be molested in
their religion.”

The chief trouble of the Maryland colony in its early days was with
William Claybourne, a trader from Virginia who had established a
settlement and trading-post on Kent’s Island. This was a part of
the territory afterwards granted to Lord Baltimore. After much
contention and dissension about the matter, in 1646 Claybourne stirred
up a rebellion. Governor Calvert, armed with royal authority, took
forcible possession of the island. A few months later Calvert died,
having appointed as his successor, Thomas Greene, a Catholic and
Royalist.

This “land of the sanctuary,” as Maryland was called, grew in wealth
and prosperity. In 1656 Hammond described it for the benefit of
home-staying Englishmen: “Maryland is (not an Island as is reported,
but) part of that main adjoining to Virginia only separated or
parted from Virginia, by a river of ten miles broad, called Patomack
River,--the commodities and manner of living as in Virginia, the soil
somewhat more temperate (as being more northerly) many stately and
navigable rivers are contained in it, plentifully stored with wholesome
springs, rich and pleasant soil, and so that its extraordinary goodness
hath made it rather desired then envied.”




William Penn

A Famous Quaker


About the middle of the seventeenth century a good deal of attention
was attracted in England to the religious sect called Quakers,
Professors, Friends, or Children of the Light. One of their ablest
exponents was George Fox. He was grave and temperate in life, but so
firm that it was said of him, “If George says _verily_ there is no
altering him.” “Verily” was the strongest word of assent he permitted
himself, obeying literally the Bible command, “Swear not at all.”

The Quakers thought that the Bible only ought to be the rule for men
and churches, that there should be no set forms of worship, and that
men should pray and preach, not at appointed times, but only as moved
by the Spirit. They believed that every man is led by the “inward
light,” or the Spirit of God, saying, “He that gave us an outward
luminary for our bodies, hath given us an inward one for our minds to
act by.” The Quakers refused to pay tithes and taxes to support the
established church and, thinking it wrong to fight, they refused to
serve in the army. At that time hats were worn indoors as well as out,
and men took them off as a token of respect. The Quaker refused to pull
off their hats to men of any rank, uncovering only in prayer. “Hat
honor was invented by men in the Fall,” they said. These Quakers were
recognized by their sober attire,--broad-brimmed hats and sober-colored
clothes,--and by their use of “thee” and “thou” and “thine” instead of
“you” and “yours.” To use the plural forms in addressing one person,
they said, was contrary to grammar, to Biblical usage, and to truth.

[Illustration: WILLIAM PENN]

When George Fox, a lad of twenty, was preaching this faith, there was
born in England one who was to spread it abroad in the New World. This
was William Penn. His father, Sir William Penn, was an Admiral in the
royal navy and was anxious to see his son master of an estate and a
title. All these plans were upset by the son who at twenty-four joined
the Quakers. His father summoned him to London to argue with him, but
the youth stood firm. He appeared covered before his father. The old
Admiral tried to effect a compromise and get him to take off his hat to
his father, the king, and the Duke of York, but he refused. He would
not yield one point of the Quaker customs, dress, language, or faith.
As he would not yield, his father in the end did so, and paid his fines.

The Quakers were so beset at home that Penn and others wished to
establish for them a refuge in the New World. Penn became one of the
owners of the colony of West New Jersey to which many Quakers went. But
he was not satisfied with his partnership here and desired a province
and colony of his own. This was not difficult to acquire. King Charles
II., who owed Admiral Penn’s estate sixteen thousand pounds, had little
gold or silver in his treasury and claimed much land in the New World.
He willingly settled his debt by granting William Penn the land west
of the Delaware; for this Penn was to pay yearly two beaver skins, and
one-fifth of all the gold and silver found in the colony. Penn wished
to call this land of woods Sylvania, and the king added to the name
that of his old friend, the Admiral, calling it Pennsylvania.

The grant was made in 1680; two years later, in order to have an outlet
to the sea, Penn secured a grant of the land which afterwards formed
the state of Delaware. The very year that this second grant was made,
many Quakers sailed to make their home in the new land. In the fall
and winter of 1682, twenty-three ships came, bringing settlers to the
Quaker colony. The next year Penn could say, “I have led the greatest
colony into America that ever any man did upon a private credit,
and the most prosperous beginnings that ever were in it are to be
found among us.” In three years there were more than seven thousand
settlers,--English, French, Dutch, Swedes, men of different races and
various creeds.

Penn made it from the first a “free colony for all mankind,” assuring
the people “You shall be governed by laws of your own making. I
shall not usurp the right of any or oppress his person.” He put the
government in the hands of a governor and of a council and general
assembly chosen by freemen. Laws were passed forbidding drunkenness,
dueling, stage plays, and card playing. Death, which was then in
England the penalty for theft and many other offences, in Pennsylvania
was inflicted only as punishment for wilful murder, according to the
law of God, as the Quakers understood it.

Penn founded his colony on principles of peace and fairness to the
Indians. Under a great elm-tree at Shakamaxon, afterwards Kensington,
he made with the natives, a treaty of peace and friendship “never
sworn to and never broken;” the red man was granted equal rights with
the white, and they were to be friends “while the creeks and rivers
run and while the sun, moon, and stars endure.” The Indians with whom
the Pennsylvania colonists were brought in contact were the mild
and peace-loving Delawares. Fortunately for the Quakers, the fierce
Susquehannocks, beaten by the Five Nations, had six years before gone
southward.

Penn laid out the site of a town at the confluence of the Delaware and
Schuylkill Rivers. He named it Philadelphia, the city of brotherly
love. It was laid out with broad fair streets for he wished it to be a
“fair and green country town.”

Two years later, Penn sailed back to England to decide a dispute about
the boundary line between Pennsylvania and Maryland. It was fifteen
years before he revisited his colony. He endeavored to see it governed
well, but from a distance this was difficult. There were men hard to
control. “For the love of God, me, and the poor country, be not so
governmentish, so uneasy, and open in your dissatisfaction,” he wrote.

When Penn returned in 1699 it was with the plan of spending his
remaining days in his colony. But two years later he learned that there
was a plan afoot to turn his province into a crown territory and he
sailed back to England to protect his rights. One matter after another
came up to detain him and he remained in England till his death in
July, 1718.




James Edward Oglethorpe

The Founder of Georgia


The colony of Georgia was the last founded of the thirteen original
colonies. It was established by Oglethorpe, a man of noble birth who
was animated by principles of philanthropy and patriotism.

James Edward Oglethorpe was born in London, about 1688. When a youth
he entered the army and fought bravely against the Turks for several
years. After his return home his attention was attracted and his
sympathy aroused by the condition of prisoners in England, especially
of poor debtors. In those days debt was regarded and punished as a
crime; debtors were confined in prisons with murderers and thieves.
It is thought that Oglethorpe’s attention was specially drawn to the
matter by the sad case of one of his friends. This man, being unable
to pay his debts, was imprisoned and loaded with chains; unable to pay
even the fees required by the jailer, he was confined in a miserable
prison where smallpox was raging, caught the disease, and died.

[Illustration: JAMES EDWARD OGLETHORPE]

Oglethorpe investigated the conditions of prison life in England
and found them bad and brutal beyond description. Most of the prisons
were filthy dens in which men, women, and children were herded
together, the child who had stolen a loaf of bread side by side with a
brutal murderer. Oglethorpe brought the subject before parliament and
succeeded in having a committee appointed to investigate the matter and
take steps to limit the corruption and cruelty of the officials.

Besides attempting to relieve their condition at home, Oglethorpe
began to plan an asylum abroad for the poor debtors and for persecuted
sects. He wished to establish a place where those who were unfortunate
and discouraged could begin life anew. It seemed to Oglethorpe that
England would derive many benefits from such a colony as he planned.
The country would be relieved of the burden of supporting unfortunate
men who there would become self-supporting. New industries might be
developed,--especially the culture of silk worms in which he was
much interested. He wished to plant this settlement in the southern
regions claimed by England, making it a military colony to prevent the
encroachments of Spain and to protect the other English colonies.

In June, 1732, Oglethorpe and twenty associates obtained a grant of
the land lying between the Savannah and Altamaha rivers and extending
westward to the Pacific Ocean, according to the usual terms of the
grants of the times. The English claimed this land by virtue of the
expeditions of Sir Walter Raleigh and they were desirous to occupy it
before it was seized by the Spanish in Florida or the French on the
Mississippi. In honor of the reigning King George II., the territory
was named Georgia.

Oglethorpe agreed with Bacon that “it is a shameful and unblessed thing
to take the scum of people and wicked condemned men to be the people
whom you plant,” and he tried to select men who were unfortunate rather
than wicked. Every opportunity was to be given the people to reform
and to build up homes and fortunes. Oglethorpe went as governor of the
colony, hoping by his personal aid and supervision to encourage and
direct the people.

For military reasons, Oglethorpe urged that negro slavery be prohibited
and that rum should not be brought into the colony. Among the men who
aided in establishing and directing the colony were John and Charles
Wesley, and George Whitefield, the famous Methodist clergymen.

In the winter of 1733, the colonists reached the New World and selected
for their settlement a place on the Savannah River, a few miles from
the sea. The Indians were conciliated with gifts and kindly treatment
and assurances that their rights should be regarded. One of the desires
of the philanthropic Oglethorpe was to civilize and christianize the
natives. In six months there were one hundred and fifty persons in the
settlement. They were a turbulent people unaccustomed to labor and with
habits of improvidence and idleness. Oglethorpe was kind but firm;
he allowed no idlers and provided tasks for even the children. Their
neighbors in South Carolina were friendly and helpful, and the colony
prospered. In the summer of 1734 Oglethorpe visited England, taking
with him as guests several Indian chiefs. Early in February, 1736, he
returned to Savannah.

Clear-sighted man of affairs that he was, he realized that a contest
with Spain must come sooner or later. He endeavored to put the country
in a position of defense. When war was declared between England and
Spain in 1739, Oglethorpe had already secured the alliance of the
Indian tribes. The Spaniards attacked an English settlement, and in
return Oglethorpe captured a Spanish outpost. With his Indian allies,
he marched against St. Augustine, but it was too strongly defended to
be taken by the forces at his command. Two years later the Spaniards
attacked Georgia; by a fortunate union of good chance and good
generalship, they were defeated. “The pauper colony,” as it had been
called, not only defended itself but saved its neighbor, South Carolina.

After this war was over, Oglethorpe returned to England and never
again revisited his colony. About ten years later, the trustees of the
colony resigned their patent and Georgia became a royal province.

Oglethorpe made his home in London where he was the friend of Walpole,
Goldsmith, Johnson, and other famous men. He died at a ripe old
age, having lived to see the colony which he had founded win its
independence in the War of the Revolution. When John Adams came to
England as minister from the United States, Oglethorpe called “to pay
his respects to the first American ambassador and his family, whom he
was glad to see in England; he expressed a great esteem and regard for
America and much regret at the misunderstandings between the countries
and felt very happy to have lived to see a termination of it.”




Philip

An Indian King


The Pilgrims were not the first white men who had visited
Massachusetts. Explorers and trading parties had landed on the coast.
At one time a fishing party had come to trade for furs and skins, and
had carried off five Indians, one of whom was Squanto. Later, another
vessel carried off twenty-seven Indians. The red men early learned to
distrust and fear the pale faces.

The settlers of Plymouth endeavored to win the friendship of the
Indians. They presented knives, copper chains, and other trinkets
to Massasoit who was sachem, or chief, of the Indian tribes of the
neighborhood, and made a treaty of friendship with him. As long as
Massasoit lived, the Indians and the English lived in comparative peace.

But year after year the natives and the colonists became less friendly
to each other. The white men came in constantly-increasing numbers and
occupied the best of the land. When the Indians had sold it for beads
or knives or trinkets, they thought that the English wished it for a
season’s hunting and fishing. But the English established farms and
villages and towns and took permanent possession. Game and fish grew
less plentiful and as the English prospered the Indians grew poorer.
The Indians resented being treated as an inferior race by the white
people. The Pilgrims resented the savages’ lack of regard for property
rights, their gathering fruit and grain and shooting cows like deer.
The two races were too different to thrive and prosper side by side.
Some of the natives adopted the faith of the white men. These “praying
Indians,” as they were called, identified themselves to a great extent
with the white people and were regarded as traitors to their own race.

However, there was no open outbreak till after the death of Massasoit.
The old sachem left two sons whom the English called Alexander and
Philip. Alexander, the elder, succeeded his father as sachem. The
English suspected that Alexander was plotting with a hostile tribe
against them, and they seized him and carried him as a prisoner to
Plymouth. Nothing could be proved against him and he was soon released,
but on the way home he died--probably of fever. The Indians, however,
thought that he had been poisoned by the white men.

Philip succeeded his brother in authority. He was a renowned warrior,
as wise and prudent as he was brave. We are told that instead of
treating his wife as a slave, according to Indian custom, he made her
his friend and companion. Next to his wife and child, Philip loved the
people of his tribe. He saw with grief that his people were constantly
growing weaker and the English were constantly increasing in numbers
and in strength. He protested against the wrongs of the Englishmen but
these wrongs were unredressed. Still, we are told, that he did not
favor war; he realized that his people were unable to withstand the
English and war would only hasten their ruin.

Against the wishes and commands of Philip, war began, brought on by the
excesses of bad men on both sides. In June, 1675, some young Indians
burned a village and were attacked by the settlers. The aroused savages
went from one bloody deed to another, burning houses and villages,
murdering men, women, and children. About the time that the war began,
Philip crossed Narragansett Bay and went to a tribe in the Connecticut
valley. For nearly a year he was not seen by the English, and we do not
know to what extent he countenanced and directed the war that was being
waged.

The town of Deerfield was burned and Hadley and Hatfield were attacked.
While the settlers at Hadley were in confusion, it is said that a
venerable old man suddenly appeared and led them forward to repel the
foe. When victory was gained, he disappeared as mysteriously as he
had come. It was asserted that this was Goffe, one of the men who had
sentenced Charles I. to death. When Charles II. became king, Goffe fled
to the New World and lived in seclusion in Connecticut. In “The Gray
Champion” Hawthorne tells this story with some changes.

The Narragansett Indians went on the war-path against the white men.
Their headquarters were on an island in a swamp which was thought to
be inaccessible. Here, in five hundred wigwams, were sheltered the
women and children of the tribe and were stored their supplies of corn.
By the treachery of one of Philip’s warriors, the path to the island
was betrayed to the white men. In the depth of winter the colonists
made their way through the swamp to the island, killed men, women, and
children without mercy, and burned the fort and the whole settlement.
King Philip’s wife and son had been taken prisoners and sent to the
Bermudas where they were sold as slaves. Still the Indians refused
to submit. One of the warriors who advised surrender was killed by
King Philip’s own hand. At last in August, 1676, he was surrounded at
his old home, Mount Hope, not far from Providence, Rhode Island, and
was shot. His body was cut to pieces and fastened on trees, and his
head was exposed on the top of a pole in Plymouth. The Puritans held
a thanksgiving to celebrate their victory in King Philip’s War. The
inevitable conflict between the white men and the red had come and the
whites were the victors. But nearly one-tenth of the fighting force
had been killed, and there was hardly a village or even a home in New
England which had not suffered loss.




Nathaniel Bacon

The Leader of the Great Rebellion


It was not only with outsiders--French, Dutch, Spaniards, and
Indians--that the English settlers had trouble. One faction in the
colonies warred against another. In Virginia the established order was
almost overthrown in the seventeenth century by the “Great Rebellion.”

For many years the governor of the colony was Sir William Berkeley,
an aristocrat who would not allow the people to have any share in the
government of the colony. He feared that if the House of Burgesses was
dismissed and new members elected he would lose control of it. So he
adjourned it from one session to another, and year after year called
together men whom he could trust to obey his will. A very stubborn and
overbearing will it was, opposed to all progress and firmly set against
granting rights to common people. He approved of high taxes and did not
wish the common people to vote; above all, he opposed public education
and the liberty of the press. “I thank God there are no free schools
nor printing presses,” he said in 1671, “and I hope we shall not have
them these hundred years.”

There were now about forty thousand people in Virginia, many of whom
had been born and reared there. For the most part, they disapproved
of Berkeley’s high-handed course and of his disregard of the rights
and privileges of the colonists. But he was the lawful governor and
they were loyal, law-abiding people; probably they would have gone on
submitting and grumbling had it not been for the Indian attacks and
Governor Berkeley’s failure to protect the outlying settlements. Fierce
Indian tribes from Pennsylvania had come south; they were now on the
borders of the Virginia colony--murdering, burning, and pillaging,
making life and property unsafe. In the spring of 1676 the House of
Burgesses voted to send five hundred men to protect the frontiers, but
instead of ordering them to march Berkeley disbanded the little army.

There was at this time in Jamestown an Englishman as brave and resolute
as Berkeley himself and as devoted to the rights of the people as
Berkeley was to those of the king. This was Nathaniel Bacon. He had
been in Virginia only a few months, but he was so popular and so
talented that soon after his arrival he was chosen a member of the
governor’s council.

A few weeks after the governor disbanded the army which should have
marched to protect the frontier settlements, Bacon received news that
the Indians had attacked his plantation on the James and had killed the
overseer and a servant. Immediately he collected a little band of his
friends and neighbors and servants, and marched against the Indians.
He sent to ask Berkeley for a commission; this was refused and Bacon
marched on without it. He defeated the Indians and returned home in
triumph.

Governor Berkeley was angry because Bacon had assumed authority without
a commission and would have liked to punish him as a traitor. But the
sympathies of the people were with the young Englishman; the governor
had to give up and in the end had to promise Bacon a commission to
fight against the Indians. He delayed drawing up the paper, however,
until Bacon at the head of several hundred planters marched to
Jamestown and required it by force.

At the head of these troops, Bacon marched from Jamestown into the
Indian country. The governor, meanwhile, declared Bacon a traitor,
raised forces, and prepared to fight. Bacon and his men pledged
themselves to stand together in defence of the rights of the people.
This was in August, 1676, a hundred years before the American
Revolution, which, like the Great Rebellion, was undertaken to uphold
the people’s rights.

When Bacon returned from war with the Indians he found war awaiting him
at home. The people of the colony were divided in their interests and
sympathies. Some sided with Bacon for people’s rights, some sided with
Berkeley because that was the cause of the king and lawful authority.
There was a stubborn fight in which Bacon was victor and became master
of Jamestown. Fearing that they could not hold it and unwilling for it
to fall into Berkeley’s hands, the rebels burned the town, the capitol
of Virginia, the first seat of English power on this continent. It is
said that Bacon and other gentlemen who had houses there fired them
with their own hands.

Bacon showed no disposition to take power into his own hands, only
wishing to put down the tyranny of Berkeley. After a brief course of
victory, he died of fever, October, 1676. His followers buried him in
the forest and the place of his grave remains unknown to this day.

A few months later, troops from England came as reinforcements to
Berkeley. He made himself again master of the colony and took swift and
bloody revenge oil his enemies. More than twenty persons were hanged
for their share in the rebellion.

“As I live,” said Charles II., angrily, when the news reached him, “the
old fool has put to death more people in that naked country than I did
for the murder of my father.”




Benjamin Franklin

A Great Typical American


The men about whom we have been reading were all natives of
Europe--Englishmen, Italians, Frenchmen, Dutchmen,--adventurers seeking
wealth or power, settlers intent on gaining national or personal power,
religious or civil liberty. It is not until the eighteenth century
that we come across our first, our great typical American. This is
Benjamin Franklin, keen and quick of wit, shrewd and energetic, a man
of business and a scholar, a politician and a scientist.

Benjamin Franklin was the son of an English tradesman of plain
respectable family, who came to New England in order to enjoy the free
exercise of his religion. He made his home in Boston. There Benjamin
was born in 1706 and there his childhood was passed. Many incidents
of it are familiar to us all. You remember how when he was a child
of seven he gave all his pennies for a whistle. But the money was
not wasted, for the incident taught him to consider the real value
of things and not to spend too much time, thought, or, money for
trifles,--in other words, “Don’t give too much for the whistle.”

[Illustration: BENJAMIN FRANKLIN]

When a little older he led his companions in taking some
building-stones to construct a wharf to stand on while fishing; he
tried to justify his conduct to his father, saying that his wharf was
a public benefit but his father taught him a great truth: “My son,
nothing can ever be truly useful, which is not at the same time truly
honest.”

Benjamin learned to read almost as soon as he learned to talk, and
he was so fond of books that his father wished to have him educated
for the ministry. This plan had to be given up for lack of money. Mr.
Franklin was a poor man with seventeen children, and when Benjamin
was only ten years old he had to leave school and help his father in
the shop. Mr. Franklin made and sold soap and candles, and it was
Benjamin’s duty to cut candle-wicks and to pour tallow into molds to
make candles. He did not like this work, and when he was twelve years
old he was apprenticed to his brother James to learn the trade of a
printer. He was so fond of books that it was thought he would like
this work. He had read with interest his father’s few books, among
which were Bunyan’s wonderful “Pilgrim’s Progress” and “Plutarch’s
Lives.” With his brother James, Benjamin had access to more books and
more opportunity for reading, but the two brothers did not get on
well together. Partly this was James’s fault, for he was harsh and
overbearing; partly it was Benjamin’s, for he tells us that he was pert
and provoking.

Although Benjamin Franklin’s school days had ended so early, his
education was just beginning; he appreciated the value of learning and
was spending his leisure in study. When he was an old man he wrote
for his son the story of his life. In this autobiography he tells
how he trained himself. He read carefully one of the papers of the
“Spectator,” a model of good English, and afterwards wrote it down
in his own words. Sometimes he changed it into verse and then later
turned it back into prose. By comparing his version with the original,
he discovered and corrected his faults. This is of interest because
Franklin became one of our best writers of good English. His command of
clear, simple, strong English won attention for what he had to say.

Young Franklin and his brother got on so badly together that he
resolved not to remain at home till the end of his apprenticeship. When
he was seventeen, he sold some of his books and left home with a few
dollars in his pocket. He went on board a vessel bound to New York.
Three days after leaving home, he landed in that city where he hoped
to find work. New York was then only a small town, and young Franklin
found no demand for his services with “the printer in the place.”
Therefore he went on to Philadelphia, which was then a much larger and
more important place than New York. Part of the way he walked, part he
traveled by boat; one Sunday morning in the autumn of 1723, he reached
Philadelphia.

In his account of his life he gives us a vivid picture of himself, a
friendless, homeless boy, walking hungry up the streets of the strange
city. He met a boy with some bread and asked where he could buy food.
Being directed to the baker’s, he asked for “three pennyworth” of bread
and received “three great puffy rolls.” Then he says, he “having no
room in my pockets, walked off with a roll under each arm and eating
the other.” Thus he passed the home of a Mr. Read, and at the door
stood his daughter Deborah, who laughed at the “awkward, ridiculous
appearance” of the strange lad. This Deborah Reed a few years later
became Franklin’s wife. Being satisfied with one roll, the youth gave
the other two to a woman and child who had come on the boat with him.

He soon got work with a printer in the town, but gave it up because
the governor offered to set him up in business for himself. He went
to London, to buy the outfit needed for his trade. On arriving there,
he found that the governor had failed to send the promised letters of
credit,--had, indeed, no credit himself--and the youth, penniless, in
a foreign land, was thrown on his own resources. He sought and secured
work as a printer, and remained in London about a year. He then
returned to Philadelphia, where he worked awhile as salesman in a shop
and afterwards at his trade. Soon after his return, he married Deborah
Read, who made him a good and helpful wife, managing his home and
aiding him in the shop.

Franklin had the “prospering virtues” of economy, industry, and
temperance, and he increased in worldly goods and in the esteem of his
townspeople. Despite some serious personal failings, he was a good
citizen and in public questions people came more and more to respect
his judgment.

In the American colonies in the eighteenth century, there were few
newspapers and those had a small circulation. Nearly every printer,
however, published an almanac which contained weather forecasts,
advice, jokes, and miscellaneous information. These almanacs had a
large sale and in many homes the only books to be found were an almanac
and a Bible. In 1733 Franklin published an almanac which he announced
was prepared by one Richard Saunders, called for short “Poor Richard,”
a character which Franklin created and represented as overflowing with
quaint humor and wise and witty sayings. “Poor Richard’s Almanac”
became the most popular of all publications of the kind. Franklin kept
up the yearly issue till 1758, when he turned it over to his partner.

Franklin was a man who was never so busy about many things that he did
not have time for another. You have been told how he acquired a good
English style; to this was added the charm that he always had something
to say that was worth hearing. He was fond of different branches of
science and was gifted with inventive talent. He studied the laws
which govern the movement of hot air, and invented what is called an
“open fireplace stove;” under the name of “the Franklin stove” or
“Pennsylvania fireplace,” a modified form of it is still in use.

When he was about forty years old, Franklin became interested in
the subject of electricity and became convinced that lightning is a
manifestation of electricity. He proved this by a famous experiment,
drawing the current down the string of a kite in a storm. He invented
the lightning rod--for he was always trying to apply the principles of
science so as to make them useful. Among his other inventions, was a
musical instrument called the “Armonica,” a kind of musical glasses.

Franklin was a progressive and public-spirited citizen. He organized
an orderly night-watch for Philadelphia, established the first
volunteer fire company, the first hospital, and the first subscription
and circulating library, in America. He interested people in the
subject of education and established an academy which became the
College of Philadelphia, and was the real origin of the University of
Pennsylvania. He originated also the American Philosophical Society “to
propagate useful knowledge.”

For years he served as postmaster, first of Philadelphia, and
afterwards as deputy postmaster-general of the colonies; he introduced
many reforms in the postal service and improved the methods of carrying
mail to and from the seventy post offices then in the country.

Franklin was now nearly fifty years of age and he was just to begin
the career which made him honored and renowned. This was his work as a
patriot at home and abroad.

When the French and Indian War broke out, he was commissioned to
procure wagons for Braddock’s army. In two weeks by the exercise of
private means and wonderful energy, he procured one hundred and fifty
wagons and two hundred and fifty pack-horses. After Braddock’s defeat,
Franklin, with a band of men whom he had persuaded to enlist, went to
protect the settlers on the frontier against the Indians.

It was not as a soldier, however, that he was to serve his country
best. Oppressive and burdensome laws were passed for the government
of the colonies, and it was resolved to send someone to England to
protest against them. Benjamin Franklin was sent to represent first
Pennsylvania, later Georgia, New Jersey, and Massachusetts. He spent
several years in England and succeeded in getting repealed the laws
to which the colonies objected. Then he returned home. But soon the
English government passed laws more oppressive than ever. One of these
was the Stamp Act. Franklin ably and eloquently presented the cause
of the colonists, stating that they were willing to bear their fair
share of expenses, but that on principle they were opposed to taxation
without representation. The king and his ministers were not disposed to
grant the reasonable demands of the colonists. Franklin was insulted
and abused. In 1775 he returned to a home made desolate during his
absence by the death of his wife.

The battle of Lexington had already been fought, and the greatest and
wisest of the Americans realized that there was nothing left but to
fight for the rights they had failed to gain by respectful petition.

In 1776 there met at Philadelphia the second Continental Congress,
composed of delegates from the colonies. It was resolved to form a
colonial government and Benjamin Franklin was one of a committee
appointed to draw up a declaration of independence. This declaration
was drafted by Thomas Jefferson and was adopted so nearly in his words
that he is regarded as its author. On the fourth of July, 1776, this
declaration was adopted by Congress, and henceforth the colonies were
fighting not only for redress of wrongs but for freedom.

The next year Dr. Franklin, then over seventy years of age, was sent to
France as one of the commissioners from the United States. It was very
important for the struggling colony to gain aid and recognition from
France. No more popular or more influential ambassador could have been
selected than Franklin; he gained terms more favorable than any other
American could have secured.

The three American commissioners did not always agree. Franklin was
accused of mismanagement of affairs, or at least of failing to exercise
proper oversight. He talked little in his own defence. “A spot of dirt
thrown upon my character I suffered while fresh to remain;” he once
said shrewdly. “I did not choose to spread by endeavoring to remove
them, but relied on the vulgar adage that they would all rub off when
dry.”

At first the French were not willing openly to help the rebelling
English colonies, but they gave secret aid. The patriots, however,
seemed to be losing instead of gaining ground, and the outlook was
gloomy at home and abroad. The commissioners in France were distressed
by a report that the English general Howe had taken Philadelphia.

“Well, doctor,” said an Englishman to Franklin, “Howe has taken
Philadelphia.”

“I beg your pardon, sir,” said Franklin, “Philadelphia has taken Howe.”

But though he endeavored to put a brave face on the matter, his heart
was full of apprehension. A messenger came from the colonies and the
commissioners rushed out to meet him, asking if Philadelphia were
really taken.

“Yes,” answered the messenger.

Franklin clasped his hands and turned to stumble back into the house.

“But, sir, I have greater news than that,” continued the messenger.
“General Burgoyne and his whole army are prisoners of war.”

The French government hesitated no longer; in a few weeks it openly
recognized the United States, and made a treaty with them.

In 1785 Franklin returned home. He was now nearly eighty, but his
public life was not at an end. He was elected President of Pennsylvania
and the next year he was sent as a delegate to the Convention which met
to form a Constitution for the United States. In April, 1790, he died
and was buried in his adopted home in Philadelphia. He had years before
written an epitaph for himself.

                  “The Body
                      of
          Benjamin Franklin, Printer,
        (Like the cover of an old book,
            Its contents torn out,
  And stripped of its lettering and gilding,)
            Lies here food for worms.
      Yet the work itself shall not be lost,
  For it will, (as he believed) appear once more
                    In a new
            And more beautiful Edition
              Corrected and Amended
                      By
                  The Author.”




Montcalm and Wolfe


You have heard of the beginnings of the French power in America--how
Cartier and La Salle, Marquette and Champlain, explored the country and
claimed it in the name of their king. They went up and down the St.
Lawrence and the Mississippi, and established along the streams their
trading-posts and military forts.

The English meanwhile, settled along the Atlantic coast and established
farms and villages.

The English patents granted to their colonists the land from the
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. The French claimed and were occupying
the Mississippi valley. The English pressed westward and crossed the
Alleghany Mountains through gaps made by the rivers which the French
claimed; the French pressed eastward along these same rivers. Contact
and conflict were inevitable. The French foresaw it and made their
preparations accordingly. From the mouth of the St. Lawrence to the
mouth of the Mississippi, they established posts and organized their
forces. French traders, French missionaries, French settlers, upheld
the power of their king. They made friends with the Indians of many
tribes, but from the day that Champlain joined battle against the
Iroquois, the Five Nations were the deadly enemies of the French and
therefore the friends of the English.

The English were, as you may think, most unwilling to give up the
western lands which they claimed. Governor Spottswood of Virginia, who
in 1716 rode westward to the summit of the Blue Ridge at the head of a
company of gentlemen, realized how important it was to hold this fair
region against the French. He urged the English government to establish
a chain of posts from the lakes to the Mississippi in order to keep
back the French. His advice was unheeded. A few years later the French
began to occupy the valley of the Ohio, and it became evident that
there the two nations would clash.

During this time there were growing into manhood two youths who were to
be leaders when the conflict came.

One of these was a Frenchman, Louis Joseph, Marquis de Montcalm. At the
age of fourteen, he entered the army and at the age of eighteen he was
a general. He did valiant service in Italy and in Germany.

Several years younger than Montcalm was the English soldier, James
Wolfe. He also became a soldier at an early age and at sixteen was
serving in the Netherlands, doing a man’s work in the battles which
he described with boyish zest in his loving and dutiful letters to his
mother in England.

About the middle of the eighteenth century, the French determined to
shorten and strengthen their line of defence towards the south. They
established a fort on French Creek and an outpost upon the Alleghany
River. This was land which the English claimed, and George Washington,
then a lad of twenty-one, was sent to the French to demand that they
leave the Ohio. A forced march was made through the pathless winter
woods. The French commander received the messenger courteously, but
informed him that they regarded the land as their own and had no
intention of yielding it to the English. This was in the winter of
1753. The next year Washington was sent in command of a little force
of three hundred and fifty men to uphold the English claim, and was
defeated at Great Meadows by a French force of double the size. The
English began to build a fort at the junction of the Alleghany and
Monongahela Rivers on a site selected by Washington, but the French
drove them away and finished the fort, which they called Fort Du Quesne.

In this emergency the colonies at first did not act together. Troops
were sent from Virginia, South and North Carolina, and Maryland; but
the Quakers of Pennsylvania and the Dutch of New York said that the
English claim to the valley of the Ohio was a matter of no importance,
and did not move. Fortunately, the home government recognized the
necessity of protecting the frontier, and of extending outposts; troops
were sent from England for this purpose. Thus in 1755 began the Seven
Years’ War which involved England and France in Europe; in America this
contest was called the French and Indian War, from the enemies the
English colonists had to encounter.

The English general Braddock led forces to the northwest just as he
would have marched them in a European campaign. He paid with his life
the penalty of his ignorance of Indian warfare, being defeated and
fatally wounded by an Indian attack in the forest. This defeat was the
first of many.

“I dread to hear from America,” said the English statesman, Pitt, as
month after month, year after year, brought tidings of defeat.

In the spring of 1756, Montcalm was sent to Canada to command the
French forces. He began a career of victory by capturing Fort Ontario
at Oswego. The next year he captured Fort William Henry at the head of
Lake George, with its garrison of twenty-five hundred men. In 1758,
with thirty-six hundred men he defended Fort Ticonderoga against an
English force of fifteen thousand. As he had neither men nor supplies
to hold the place, he was compelled to abandon it the next year and
retire to Quebec. Here he was to contend in a death struggle with the
English general Wolfe, who was sent to America in 1758.

The English realized the value of their New World possessions. The
best of their troops were sent over to prosecute the war with vigor.
Montcalm, on the other hand, lacked men, means, ammunition, and
supplies, for which he appealed in vain to the home government. With a
sad heart he foresaw the downfall of French power in America. Resolved
“to find his grave under the ruins of the colony,” he bent all his
energies to the struggle.

One place after another was captured by the English. News of their
victories came now as regularly as tidings of their defeat had come
a few months before. Louisburg, a naval station and fortified town
commanding the mouth of the St. Lawrence, was attacked and taken. The
French were driven from Fort Frontenac at Oswego which guarded the
outlet of the Great Lakes. Fort Du Quesne was taken by Washington, and
Crown Point was captured and strengthened.

In 1759 the rival powers made ready for a final struggle at Quebec, the
stronghold of the French. Montcalm had retired there and collected his
forces--fourteen thousand men. Wolfe, with a smaller army, besieged
the place. Week after week the English endeavored to find a vulnerable
spot; week after week the French held the strongly-fortified city.
At last Wolfe determined to conduct soldiers up a bluff which was so
steep that it was thought to be inaccessible and so was not strongly
guarded.

One September night his boats dropped down the river and landed the
soldiers who marched up the cliff. On the way Wolfe quoted some lines
from Gray’s noble poem, “The Elegy in a Country Churchyard:”

  “The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
    And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave
  Await alike the inevitable hour:--
    The paths of glory lead but to the grave.”

“I would rather have written that than to take Quebec,” he said.

By daybreak four thousand, five hundred men were on the heights above
Quebec. Montcalm, with such a force as he could collect, made ready to
attack.

Wolfe gave his last charge to his men: “The officers and men will
remember what their country expects from them, and what a determined
body of soldiers are capable of doing against five weak battalions,
mingled with a disorderly peasantry. The soldiers must be attentive to
their officers, and resolute in the execution of their duty.”

He led his men forward to the plains of Abraham, an open tract about
a mile from Quebec. In the attack Wolfe was wounded. He was informed
that the French were retreating and an eye-witness says that he “raised
himself up on this news and smiled in my face. ‘Now,’ said he, ‘I die
contented,’ and from that instant the smile never left his face till he
died.”

Montcalm, too, was mortally wounded. On being told that death was near
he said, “So much the better; I shall not live to see the surrender of
Quebec.”

The fall of this stronghold was the practical loss of Canada. By the
treaty of peace in 1763, France yielded to England all her northern
possessions in America, and her claim on the eastern valley of the
Mississippi.




Patrick Henry

An Eloquent Orator


Up to the very time that war was begun, Franklin hoped that it might
be averted; even then while he hoped that the colonies would get their
rights, he expected them to remain subject to England. Patrick Henry
was one of the few men who looked with eagle eye into the future and
saw that the American cause--the cause of freedom--must be upheld by
force of arms.

Patrick Henry was born in Virginia, in 1736. He was an awkward and
idle lad who picked up a smattering of an education at an “old field
school,” as the country schools of the time were called. He was fond of
books, but fonder still of his gun and his fishing-rod with which he
spent most of his spare time in the woods.

It was, however, necessary for him to set to work when a boy of
fifteen. He became a clerk in a store and then opened a little shop
of his own--but he did not succeed either as clerk or shopkeeper.
He married in young manhood and in order to support his wife and
children he went to work on a farm; here also he failed. He went back
to shopkeeping--and failed again. By this time people had a poor
opinion of the idle, slovenly young man whose life had been a series of
failures. The truth is, Henry was like a fish out of water; but in the
course of time he was to find his element.

At the age of twenty-four, he read law for six weeks, was examined by
judges, and was given a license to practice the profession. The judges
granted his license with much hesitation. Henry was ignorant of the
law,--had indeed read only the Virginia Statutes and one other law
book. But he showed remarkable powers of thought and reasoning, natural
not acquired qualifications, and the license was granted on condition
that he would continue to study. One of the judges said, “Mr. Henry, if
your industry be only half equal to your genius, I augur that you will
do well, and become an ornament and an honor to your profession.”

It is not strange, however, that the small amount of law business
which was in his community did not come Henry’s way. People naturally
preferred to put their business in the hands of those whom they
considered better qualified. He eked out a support for his family by
aiding his father-in-law to manage a tavern.

In 1763 he had what seems to have been his first really important
case,--one which was turned over to him because no one else cared
to undertake it. This was the famous “Parsons’ Case.” In order to
understand it, you must remember that the colony of Virginia was
then a part of England and that the church of England, like its
civil government, was established by law. The salaries of clergymen
were raised by a regular tax on all the people. As money was scarce
in the colonies, this tax was paid in tobacco which was the regular
currency of Virginia. By law sixteen thousand pounds of tobacco was a
clergyman’s yearly salary.

The people do not seem to have objected to paying these salaries, and
usually they found no fault with the amount of them. Twice, however,
after bad crop years, the House of Burgesses passed laws allowing the
payment of money instead of tobacco at a rate lower than the price
of tobacco in these years of scarcity. Naturally, the clergymen did
not like this, and they finally appealed to the king of England who
decided that the salaries must be paid in tobacco every year. So the
clergymen of Hanover county where Henry lived brought suit for the loss
sustained by the payment of money instead of tobacco. As the king,
who was the supreme authority, had decided the matter in favor of the
clergymen, it seemed that there was nothing for the Virginia courts
to do but to agree on the amount of damages due and pay them. Henry,
however, offered to plead the case against the parsons and plead it he
did with unexpected power. He told the people fearlessly that this was
a matter for them to decide. They were to be governed by their House
of Burgesses. It had made this law, and the king of England had no
right to gainsay it. Henry spoke so eloquently that he won the sympathy
of all. The jury could not put aside the king’s decree but it gave a
nominal adherence to that and a real one to Henry’s argument; for it
stated the clergymen’s damages as one penny each, about two cents.

From that time Henry was “the man of the people;” a little ahead of the
conservative element, but always in sympathy with the people and always
upon the side of the cause which in the end proved right. After his
success in “the Parsons’ Case,” he did not lack law business. He was
sent in the spring of 1765 to the House of Burgesses at Williamsburg.
This was then the site of the Virginia government; having been selected
after Jamestown was burned in the Great Rebellion.

The people of the colonies--even the loyal Virginians--were beginning
to be dissatisfied with the treatment of the mother-country. The Seven
Years’ War between England and France had come to an end two years
before. It had, of course, cost a great deal of money; in particular,
the sending of troops and supplies against the French in America had
been very expensive. The English government said that the colonies
ought to bear a large share of the war debt; the contest had begun on
the American frontier and the English victory had extended colonial
territory and trade. On the whole, this was not unfair. Probably the
colonies would have agreed to it, if they had been allowed to send
representatives to parliament--the English legislative body which has
the power of taxation. But the English were not willing to grant that
right. Then, said the Americans, “We must not be taxed. ‘Taxation
without representation is tyranny.’”

England paid little attention to the protests from America. A Stamp Act
was passed,--that is, a law requiring a stamp to be put on all papers
to make them legal. The money for these stamps was to be a source of
revenue to help pay the war debt. When the matter was being discussed,
Virginia protested against this Stamp Act. Nevertheless, in May, 1765,
a copy of the act was sent to the Virginia legislature, with the
information that it had become a law and must be enforced at a certain
time.

In the House of Burgesses, in 1765, among stately gentlemen in silks
and velvets with their curled and powdered wigs, sat a raw country
man dressed in shabby clothes and wearing his own plain hair. This
was Patrick Henry. One day he arose and addressed that gathering of
high-bred scholarly men and presented certain resolutions to the effect
that the people of the colonies had all the rights and privileges of
the people of Great Britain,--were like them Englishmen--and that the
taxes must, according to “characteristics of British freedom” be laid
by the people themselves or by those chosen by them--that only the
general assembly of Virginia had a right to lay taxes on Virginians,
and that the people were not bound to obey any other laws.

In the heated discussion which followed, Henry protested against the
despotic action of the king. “Cæsar had his Brutus, Charles I. his
Cromwell, and George III.”--

“Treason, treason!” came the interruption.

“May profit by their example,” concluded the orator. “If that be
treason make the most of it.”

Henry’s resolutions were carried by a majority of one. These
resolutions and his speech had “started the ball of revolution
rolling.” The Stamp Act, so vigorously protested against, was repealed,
but new and hateful taxes were laid on tea, glass, paper, and other
articles.

Ten years passed during which Henry practiced his profession, served
four years in the House of Burgesses, and took an interest in all
public questions. During these ten years, the colonies had drifted
and been driven further from England, the mother-country. Patrick
Henry saw that the encroachments on the rights of the people must
be resisted--not by words now, but by arms. In the spring of 1775 a
convention of Virginia leaders met in St. John’s church in Richmond to
consider the state of the country.

Henry rose and “resolved that this colony be immediately put in a
posture of defence.” The matter was argued earnestly; many men advised
sending new petitions to the king. Then Patrick Henry made the speech,
which every schoolboy knows, urging not petition but action. “Is life
so dear,” he ended, “or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price
of chains and slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God! I know not what course
others may take but as for me give me liberty or give me death!”

He carried the patriots with him and his resolutions were passed; thus
Virginia announced that she would fight for her rights. A few weeks
later the English general, Gage, attacked the people in Massachusetts
and the colonies sprang to arms.

Henry served three years as governor of Virginia. After the Revolution,
he took for some time an active part in public affairs and then
withdrew to private life. In 1799, at the personal request of
Washington, he became a candidate for office and was elected to the
House of Delegates. But he did not live to take his seat, dying June 6,
1799.




Samuel Adams

A Massachusetts Patriot


Samuel Adams is often called “the father of the Revolution.” He was the
great-grandson of one of the Puritan settlers who came to Massachusetts
in the seventeenth century, and was born at Boston, Massachusetts, in
1722.

Adams was not a typical thrifty New Englander. His private life was
a series of business failures and hardships that remind us of the
early career of Patrick Henry. Adams, however, unlike Henry, was
college bred, having been educated at Harvard. He tried law as a
profession, but did not like it well enough to continue its practice.
Then he became, first a clerk and then a merchant, and as both he
was a failure. Next he became a brewer, and in this trade, also, he
was unsuccessful. The truth is, he kept too busy attending to public
business to pay proper attention to his private affairs. Perhaps his
attention was first called to public matters by a private grievance.
A law passed by Parliament against certain stock-companies made
it necessary to close a banking company with which his father was
connected and swept away his fortune.

[Illustration: SAMUEL ADAMS]

Unsuccessful as Samuel Adams was as a business man, it was known
that he was a good citizen, with wise and patriotic views about
public matters. He ably voiced colonists’ objections to the arbitrary
taxation of the British government. “If taxes are laid upon us,” he
said, in a paper in 1764, “in any shape without our having a legal
representation where they are laid, are we not reduced from the
character of Free Subjects to the miserable state of tributary Slaves?
We claim British rights not by charter only. We are born to them!”

Adams was a member of the Massachusetts legislature in 1765 and the
famous “Massachusetts Resolves” were his work. They expressed loyalty
to the king, but refused to aid to execute the Stamp Act. It was not
against England as yet but against the unjust laws of the despotic king
and ministry that there was hostility.

Hutchinson, who was the royal governor, informed the home government
that its course was unwise. “It cannot be good policy,” he said, “to
tax the Americans; it will prove prejudicial to the national interests.
You will lose more than you will gain. Britain reaps the profit of all
their trade and of the increase of their substance.” But his warning
was unheeded, and it devolved upon him to execute the unpopular acts.
He suffered as the instrument of British oppression. His house was
attacked and destroyed, and he and his family were driven away.

The first of November came--the day on which the Stamp Act was to go
into effect. Boston church bells tolled and minute guns were fired.
The stamps lay untouched; business stopped, because people would
not buy and use them as required by law. The Stamp Act was repealed,
but Parliament at the same time took occasion to assert “that it was
competent to legislate for the colonies in all cases whatsoever.” Other
unjust taxes were laid and protest followed protest from the colonies.

In order to uphold the king’s authority, British soldiers were sent
to Boston. On a March day in 1770 occurred one of the many quarrels
between the soldiers and the citizens. A company of soldiers was sent
out to disperse the mob; it refused to disperse, and the soldiers
fired, killing three people and wounding several others. This was the
famous “Boston massacre.”

The infuriated people would have attacked the soldiers but Samuel Adams
persuaded them to refrain from disorder and bloodshed; he advised
them to demand from the governor the withdrawal of the two regiments
stationed in Boston. This was agreed to and the next day a committee,
of which Samuel Adams was the spokesman, went to Governor Hutchinson to
make this demand. The governor said at first that he had no authority
to remove the troops; after talking with the commander, however, he
promised to send one regiment away.

“Sir,” said Samuel Adams, “if you have authority to remove one regiment
you have authority to remove two; and nothing short of the departure of
the troops will satisfy the public mind or restore the peace of the
province.”

The governor finally had to yield to the demand of the people that he
withdraw “both regiments or none” and the soldiers were sent to the
castle.

As time passed, Adams ceased to hope for reconciliation between the
colonies and England. He realized that it was important for the
colonies to make common cause in defence of their rights. On his motion
in the Massachusetts legislature in 1772 citizens were appointed as
Committees of Correspondence to “state, communicate, and publish the
rights of the colonies.” From this beginning grew the union of the
colonies.

Matters came to a crisis in Boston when the tea on which a tax was laid
was sent to the port. It had been sent to New York and Philadelphia,
and there the people refused to allow it to be landed and it was
returned to England. In South Carolina it was landed and left to mold
in cellars because the people would not purchase it. In December, 1773,
Samuel Adams, so often the spokesman of the people, went to ask the
governor to send the tea back to England, instead of having it landed
in Boston. In old South Church were assembled seven thousand people, to
hear the result of his embassy. The governor refused.

“This meeting can do nothing more to save the country,” said Samuel
Adams when he announced the fact. But another scheme was on foot which
was probably known to Adams if not inspired by him. Some men disguised
as Indians went to the harbor and threw overboard the three hundred and
forty chests of tea. The next morning the patriots drank a decoction
of native herbs while the Chinese tea floated on the salt waters of
the bay. The Boston Tea Party, as it was called, by its disregard of
the rights of property and its defiance of his authority, made the
king very angry. There was passed the Boston Port Bill, which forbade
vessels to enter or leave that port.

General Gage was sent to Boston with soldiers to enforce the king’s
laws. General Gage realized that Samuel Adams, “the Cromwell of New
England,” was the ringleader of the rebellion. An attempt was made to
bribe Adams, who was very poor, with money or with position. But Adams
was proof against the British offers. “I trust I have long since made
my peace with the King of kings,” he said. “No personal consideration
shall induce me to abandon the righteous cause of my country.”

In June Gage dissolved the general court, and the patriots organized
a government of their own. Largely through the influence of Samuel
Adams, it was resolved that representatives of the colonies should
meet in Philadelphia to discuss affairs. He went as the representative
of Massachusetts, which was suffering most from British oppression,
having her port closed and an army stationed on her soil. We are told
that Adams rode to Philadelphia on a borrowed horse, wearing a coat
presented to him “to enable him to make a decent appearance.”

Delegates from eleven colonies met in this Congress in September,
1774, and discussed their situation. Among the delegates was a traitor
who gave the royalists a full account of the meetings. This man said,
“Samuel Adams eats little, drinks little, sleeps little, and thinks
much. He is most decisive and indefatigable in the pursuit of his
object. He is the man who, by his superior application, manages at once
the factions in Philadelphia and the factions of New England.”

The people were now getting ready to fight. Minute men were being
drilled, firearms and powder and ball were being collected. Samuel
Adams encouraged all these preparations.

One night lights in the belfry of the North Church at Boston--a system
of signals agreed upon--informed the patriots that British troops
were leaving the city. They were going to seize the military stores
collected at Concord and Worcester by the patriots. Longfellow’s poem,
“Paul Revere,” tells in stirring phrase how the patriot-messenger
galloped forth to give the alarm. In Medford he roused John Hancock and
Samuel Adams, two leaders whom Gage was anxious to capture. The minute
men sprang to arms. When the British soldiers, eight hundred in number,
reached the village of Lexington about four o’clock on the morning of
April 19, 1775, they found sixty or seventy men collected on the green.

“Disperse, you rebels!” said the English officer. “Lay down your arms.”

The men stood firm. Captain Parker had already given his orders: “Stand
your ground! Don’t fire unless fired upon, but if they mean war let it
begin here.”

The British fired and the shots of the Americans rang out in answer;
eight Americans lay dead on the green. The War of the Revolution was
begun. Adams and Hancock heard the shots as they galloped from Medford.

“Oh, what a glorious morning for America this is,” said Adams.

At Concord the minute men assembled and put the British to flight. From
there to Boston, sixteen miles away, they fired on the British from
behind trees and stone walls. Finally, the British broke and ran.

On the northwest Boston was commanded by Bunker Hill and Breed’s Hill.
A force of Americans under Colonel Prescott occupied Breed’s Hill one
night and threw up earthworks to protect the city. The British soldiers
marched forth to attack them and the American troops formed behind the
earthworks and on the edge of Bunker Hill.

“Wait till you can see the whites of their eyes,” said the American
leader, wishing to use the small supply of ammunition with deadly
results. Twice the British attacked and twice they were driven back.
Then the ammunition of the patriots was exhausted and they had to
retreat. The news of the battle between the patriots and the king’s
troops was borne to the other colonists; they came to the aid of
Massachusetts.

Samuel Adams, who had done so much to inspire resistance to oppression,
did not serve the patriot’s cause on the battle-field. His work was
in Congress, and his position as a leader was so well recognized
that the English excluded from the offer of pardon to the rebels two
men--Hancock, the first signer of the Declaration of Independence, and
“one Samuel Adams.”

After the war was over, Adams served as governor of Massachusetts.
He aided to draft the state constitution, the only one of the old
constitutions adopted immediately after the Revolution which is still
in force. He died, October 2, 1803, and was buried in Boston. In the
busy business heart of the city, there is a metal disc bearing the
inscription, “This marks the grave of Samuel Adams.”




George Washington

The Leader of the Revolution


The story of Washington, the personal history of the man who was
identified with the independence of our country, has been told over
and over and yet it never fails to find interested listeners and one
can well believe that it never will. He was born, February 22, 1732,
on a plantation, or large farm, in Westmoreland County, Virginia. His
father, Augustine Washington, was master of many broad acres but lacked
what seem to us the very comforts of life. There was a houseful of
children, too--four by the first wife, and six (of whom George was the
eldest), by the second wife Mary Ball.

Mary Washington was kept busy with household cares. She superintended
not only the cooking and washing and housework, but the spinning of
thread, the weaving of cloth, the making of clothes, and other tasks
which were then a part of home routine.

When George was three years old, the family moved to Washington, the
place afterwards named Mount Vernon, and there they lived about four
years.

When George was about seven, the family moved to a farm on the
Rappahannock, across the river from what was then the little village
of Fredericksburg. George was sent to an old field school where he was
taught “to read and write and cipher.” He was fond of writing and he
wrote a clear, careful hand. His early copy books have been kept and we
can read on the yellowed pages the moral precepts which he copied down
with great care when he was twelve years old.

George early learned to ride and swim and excelled at outdoor sports
and games, thanks to a strong body and determined, energetic spirit.
An early biographer, Weems, tells many stories of his childhood which
are widely known. Of their truth or falsehood we cannot be sure. One is
the famous story that George cut down a valuable cherry tree belonging
to his father, and promptly confessed his misdeed, choosing punishment
rather than falsehood. Another is that he undertook in boyish bravado
to subdue his mother’s favorite colt and continued the struggle until
the animal burst a blood-vessel and died. This, also, he immediately
confessed, and his mother while grieved over the death of her colt
“rejoiced that her son was brave and truthful.”

Mr. Washington died when George was only ten years old, and on the
mother devolved the early training of the children. After his early
childhood, George was with her but little. He was sent, soon after
his father’s death, to live with one of his older brothers to attend
school. When he was fourteen, it was planned that he should go as a
sailor, but the plan was given up and he returned to school and took up
the study of surveying.

His half-brother Lawrence, fourteen years older than he, was a soldier;
perhaps as a boy George, who admired and loved this brother, wished and
planned to be a soldier, too. If so, he no doubt thought that he would
wear a British uniform and fight for the king as did his brother, for
the colonists then were contented and loyal subjects of England.

Lawrence Washington after his father’s death inherited the estate
of Washington and changed its name to Mount Vernon, in honor of an
English admiral under whom he had served. Lawrence Washington, who was
a fine, manly fellow, married a Miss Fairfax whose home was near Mount
Vernon. She was a cousin of Thomas, Lord Fairfax, an English gentleman
who came to America to look after land which he had inherited from
his grandfather. This was a royal grant of all the land between the
Rappahannock and Potomac Rivers. Lord Fairfax did not even know how
many thousands of acres were in this great estate. So he employed young
George Washington to explore and survey his lands.

George Washington was sixteen years old when he set out, March, 1748,
with one companion, to explore and survey Lord Fairfax’s land. He had
a good horse and a gun as well as his surveyor’s instruments, and the
two youths spent several weeks on the trip. Sometimes they met Indians
and sat beside their camp fires and watched their war dances. Sometimes
they slept outdoors, sometimes they spent the night in the rude huts of
the settlers. “I have not slept above three or four nights in a bed,”
George Washington wrote, “but after walking a good deal all the day,
I have lain down before the fire on a little straw, or fodder, or a
bearskin, whichever was to be had, with man, wife, and children, like
dogs and cats; and happy is he who gets the berth nearest the fire.”

On his return Washington gave such a glowing description of the
beautiful and fertile country he had visited, that Lord Fairfax
determined to move there and make his home at Greenway Court. He
employed young Washington to make a careful survey of his lands and
got him appointed public surveyor. During the next three years when
Washington was not at work in the field he stayed at Greenway Court
with Lord Fairfax. This gentleman was a scholar and a courtier and
from intercourse with him the young surveyor gained breadth of mind
and polished manners, while his outdoor life was making him strong and
robust.

At twenty he was a picture of stalwart manhood--over six feet in
height, straight as an Indian, and with dignified manners. About this
time his brother Lawrence died, leaving Mount Vernon to his little
daughter; George, his favorite brother, was to manage the estate and in
case of the child’s death was to inherit it.

He went home to take charge of the fine old estate, but he did not
long remain there. France and England were beginning their contest for
supremacy in the country along the Ohio. When only twenty-one, George
Washington was appointed to bear a protest to the French against their
occupancy of the land. He set out the very day that he received his
appointment, accompanied by some white woodsmen and Indian hunters.
His was a long, difficult journey through the untraveled forest to a
fort hundreds of miles away near Lake Erie, and it was a vain one. He
was received courteously by the commander but was informed that the
French were ordered to hold the country and would do so. The return
journey was even more difficult than the journey to the fort. It was
the depth of winter; the ground was covered with snow and the streams
blocked with ice. Leaving the remainder of the party to follow later
on horseback, Washington set out on foot with a woodsman named Gist.
The two men made their way through the country inhabited by hostile
Indians and fierce beasts. Once an Indian shot at young Washington,
once he fell into an ice-blocked stream and came near losing his
life; he accomplished the dangerous journey in safety and hurried to
Williamsburg to inform the governor of the result of his expedition.

It was resolved to defend the frontiers, and some men were sent out
to build a fort at the Forks of the Ohio River near Pittsburg. But
these men were attacked and defeated by the French who finished and
occupied the fort. This they called Fort Du Quesne. The French soldiers
marched forth in the spring of 1754 to meet the little band commanded
by Washington. Washington, having defeated a small body of the French,
stopped at a place called Great Meadows, and defended his troops by
an earthwork which he called Fort Necessity. Here he and his soldiers
fought bravely against a French force of far superior numbers to which
they had to yield at last.

The next year, Washington, in charge of the Virginia troops, went with
General Braddock, commanding the English forces, to attack the French
and take Fort Du Quesne. Braddock was brave but stubborn and ignorant
of the methods of Indian warfare. Washington wished the Virginia
rangers to march in front in order to guard the army against surprise.

“What!” said Braddock, “a Virginia colonel teach a British general how
to fight!”

Off he marched with flags flying, drums beating, and men in close
ranks. Before they reached Fort Du Quesne, the French and Indians
attacked them and inflicted a terrible defeat. Braddock paid the
penalty of his folly with his life. Washington made a gallant effort to
redeem the day. He said, “I had four bullets through my coat and two
horses shot under me, yet escaped unhurt, altho’ death was levelling
my companions on every side of me.” On him devolved the difficult task
of leading the shattered remnant of the army back home, protecting it
against the unfriendly Indians and the hostile French.

After this campaign he was tendered a vote of thanks in the House of
Burgesses. When he rose to reply, he blushed and faltered so that the
Speaker said, “Sit down, Colonel Washington, sit down. Your modesty
equals your valor, and that surpasses the power of any language I
possess.”

Two years later, as commander of the troops raised in Virginia to
defend the frontier he marched against Fort Du Quesne. The French,
unable to hold it, set fire to it and retreated; on the spot, the
English built a new fort which they called Fort Pitt in honor of an
English statesman, and on the site of this fort stands now the city of
Pittsburg. The English were victors now and as most of the fighting was
in New York and Canada instead of the Ohio country, Washington resigned
his commission and went home to Virginia.

In January, 1759, he married Mrs. Martha Custis, a widow with a fine
estate and two children. Washington had no children of his own and his
step-children, John Parke Custis and Martha Parke Custis, were like his
own children. In the lists of goods he ordered from England we find
such items as “One fashionable dress Doll to cost a guinea” and “A
box of Gingerbread Toys and Sugar Images or Comfits.” “Patsy,” as the
little girl was called, died in early girlhood, but the boy lived to
become a man and married, leaving at his death four children of whom
two, George Washington Parke Custis and Eleanor Parke Custis, made
their home at Mount Vernon as Washington’s adopted children.

Probably the happiest and most carefree years of Washington’s life
were those after his marriage which were spent at Mount Vernon which
he had inherited at the death of his niece. Farming was his “most
favorite pursuit,” and he devoted himself with characteristic energy to
improving his land by manures and rotation of crops, and his stock of
sheep, cattle, and horses by selection and breeding. He was a member
of the House of Burgesses, took an interest in public affairs, and was
regarded as one of the leading men in the colony.

Not long after the French and Indian War, trouble arose between
the colonies and England about taxation without representation. As
you know, the trouble in Boston finally led to the passage of the
Boston Port Bill. Virginia and the other colonies sympathized with
Massachusetts. In a speech in the House of Burgesses Washington said,
“I will raise a thousand men, subsist them at my own expense, and march
with them, at their head, for the relief of Boston.”

George Washington was one of the six Virginia delegates to the first
continental congress in September, 1774. It was decided to raise
a colonial army, and, June 15, 1775, Washington was appointed its
commander-in-chief. In his speech accepting the office he refused to
receive pay for his services, saying that only his expenses in the
service should be repaid him at the end of the war. June 21 he left
Philadelphia and rode to Massachusetts to take charge of the troops. On
the third of July, at Cambridge under a great elm-tree still known as
“Washington’s elm,” he assumed command of the army. He was an imposing
figure, a tall handsome man dressed in a blue coat with buff facings
and buff small clothes or knee trousers. The army of which he took
command, was, he said, “a mixed multitude of people, under very little
discipline, order, or government.” These troops, about sixteen thousand
in number, had most of them been enlisted for but a short time and they
lacked provisions and supplies,--above all, ammunition. Throughout
the war there was scarcity of ammunition and the enemy’s stores of
powder and ball and firearms were the most welcome part of an American
victory. During the first months, however, the Americans had more
experience of defeat than of victory.

In the spring of 1776 the Americans took possession of Dorchester
Heights and the British evacuated Boston a few days later. When their
fleet put to sea, Washington marched across the country, hoping to keep
them from landing in New York. But the enemy were too strong for him
and they took possession of the city.

Up to this time the patriots had been fighting for their rights as
British colonists. July 4, 1776, the Declaration of Independence
was adopted and the fight was now for freedom. Of this Washington
said, “When I first took command of the army I abhorred the idea of
independence, but I am fully convinced that nothing else will save us.”

At Cambridge Washington had used a flag with thirteen stripes of red
and white, and the red and white cross of the British flag in the
corner; in 1777 Congress adopted as the national flag one with the
stripes but having, instead of the British cross, thirteen stars to
represent the thirteen colonies.

As we said, the Americans were unable to prevent the British from
landing in New York. Then the patriots were defeated in the battle
of Long Island and Washington was forced to retreat. Pursued through
New Jersey, he crossed the river into Pennsylvania, with about three
thousand ragged, hungry, discouraged soldiers. It was now winter and
it was supposed that the troops would go into winter quarters. But
Washington did not wish to give up the year’s campaign without striking
one successful blow. By a sudden march the day after Christmas, he
surprised and captured a force of one thousand Hessians at Trenton
and then he defeated an English force at Princeton. These victories
inspired hope and the patriots began the campaign of 1777 with renewed
courage.

But it was a year of reverses. The patriots were defeated at Brandywine
in September and at Germantown in October and went into winter quarters
at Valley Forge in December in a pitiable condition. They lacked
clothing, food, military stores. The campaign in the north was more
successful. At Saratoga General Gates won a signal victory and Burgoyne
was forced to surrender his army. It was this victory which led the
French to declare in favor of the colonists.

There was formed a conspiracy to depose Washington and to put at the
head of the army General Gates who had won the victory of the campaign.
Congress, however, supported Washington and collected men and supplies
for a new campaign. The army was drilled in the winter of 1778 by Baron
von Steuben, a Prussian officer who had served under Frederic the Great.

In 1778 the British evacuated Philadelphia and Washington attacked them
at Monmouth. Here he had a clash with General Charles Lee; his temper,
usually under control, rose at what he considered General Lee’s failure
to perform his duty.

The little army marched north and encamped near White Plains. In
this vicinity it remained during the year. During the campaign of
1779 also, Washington remained in the Highlands of the Hudson on the
defensive. The next year came French aid. That same year the plot of
General Arnold to surrender West Point to the English was discovered
from papers in the possession of a captured spy. This spy, the brave
young General André, paid the penalty with his life; the traitor Arnold
escaped to the British.

In 1781 brilliant victories were won at the south by General Greene,
General Morgan and by Marion, called “the Swamp Fox.” That same year
Washington, aided by the French troops, invested Lord Cornwallis’s men
at Yorktown, and forced them to surrender.

A treaty of peace, made in September, 1783, ended the war which,
as Pitt said, “was conceived in injustice, nurtured in folly, and
whose footsteps were marked with blood and devastation.” In November
the British evacuated New York and on December the fourth Washington
read his farewell address to the army. He resigned his commission to
Congress, thinking that his remaining days were to be spent in private
life at the home he loved.

But his country needed him still. Victory had been won indeed, but the
debt and burden of war remained. Congress with its limited delegated
power was unable to settle matters, and there seemed danger that the
colonies, united in their struggle against British oppression, would
drift apart. Washington had won public confidence; it was he who could
best advance the work of peace. He presided over the Convention of 1787
which framed a Constitution for the newly-established United States.
This was adopted by the required number of states and Washington
was unanimously chosen President of the United States. On April 30,
1789, he assumed the duties of the office in New York, which was the
first seat of national government. He entered upon the performance
of his work as president with the conscientious attention which he
gave to all matters. He aided to organize the different departments
of the government and appointed as their heads the ablest men in the
country--Hamilton, Jefferson, and others. He never openly allied
himself with either the Federalist party led by Hamilton or the
Democratic-Republican party led by Jefferson, but strove for union and
peace.

After serving eight years, he declined to be a candidate a third
time--thus establishing a precedent that no President shall serve a
third term. In 1796 Washington delivered a farewell address to the
people he had led and served. He retired to private life, but did not
live long to enjoy his well-earned rest. December 14, 1799, he died and
was buried at his home at Mount Vernon. The eulogy pronounced on him by
“Light Horse Harry” Lee well said that he was “First in war, first in
peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen, he was second to none
in the humble and endearing scenes of private life.”




Philip Schuyler


Philip Schuyler was a member of an old Dutch family in New York, which
had extensive possessions on the river Hudson. Under a French tutor,
he received a better education than was usual in colonial days. He was
an energetic manly lad, and early learned to ride and skate, to shoot
and manage a boat. He grew up an intelligent man and a good woodsman,
trained in the learning of the frontiers.

His father died when he was eight years old; Philip was the eldest son
and when he attained his majority, according to the English custom
he became master of his father’s wealth. This did not accord with
Schuyler’s Dutch ideas of justice nor with his native generosity; he
divided the property equally with his brothers and sisters.

In the French and Indian war Schuyler, like Washington and others,
gained the military experience which was later to be so valuable to his
country. In his subordinate position there came no opportunity for him
to distinguish himself especially, but he served with credit and honor.
A characteristic story is told of him on this campaign. The troops
were crossing the Oswego river and as the boats were crowded a wounded
prisoner was about to be left behind. Schuyler quietly put his gun and
coat in a boat, took the prisoner on his back, swam across the stream,
and put the wounded man in charge of a surgeon before he rejoined his
company.

It was largely through Schuyler’s influence that New York joined
Virginia and Massachusetts first in protesting and then in fighting
against the oppressions of England. He was a delegate to the
Continental Congress and was appointed by Congress a major-general--a
place to which he was entitled by his position and services and by his
experience in the French and Indian War. He was, however, unpopular
from the first with Samuel Adams and the leaders of the New England
party. They could not forget that he was of Dutch descent, and a native
of the colony which had quarreled with New England about boundary lines.

On the morning of June 21, 1775, George Washington, Philip Schuyler,
and Charles Lee rode out of Philadelphia, going northward to the seat
of war. Washington was to assume command of the army at Cambridge and
Schuyler was to take charge of the troops in New York and lead an
expedition against Canada. The three horsemen had gone about twenty
miles when they met a courier bringing Congress tidings of the battle
of Bunker Hill.

“Did the militia stand fire?” asked Washington eagerly. When informed
that they did, he exclaimed, “The Liberties of the country are safe!”

During the ride to New York, Washington and Schuyler learned to know
and esteem each other and the friendship begun then was never broken.

The position of the state of New York made its control a matter of
great importance. The little settlement--it was seventh in population
of the sparsely-settled colonies--was midway between the northern and
the southern colonies. If it were under British control, it would be a
wedge to separate them. Philip Schuyler was stationed in the northern
part of the province. His illness made it necessary for Montgomery
to take charge of the army sent against Quebec. As soon as Schuyler
was able to move, he set to work to raise men and supplies, advancing
his own funds for the purpose when those furnished by Congress proved
pitifully inadequate. To the impatient and sometimes irritated letters
of the young patriot, Washington sent words of encouragement and
counsel, saying, “In a little time we shall work up these raw materials
into a good manufacture. I must recommend to you, what I endeavor to
practice myself, patience and perseverance.”

In the campaign of 1777 the British, now largely reinforced, planned
to occupy New York and so to separate the northern and the southern
colonies. General Burgoyne was to lead eight thousand men down Lake
Champlain; Colonel St. Leger was to go down the valley of the Mohawk
from Oswego; and General Howe was to come up the Hudson. This force of
thirty-three thousand men was to take possession of New York.

At first it seemed as if the British were to succeed. They marched
on Ticonderoga, “the door to Canada,” which Ethan Allen and Benedict
Arnold had captured in May, 1775. The British general determined to
place his cannon on a rocky height commanding the fort. He was told
that the height was inaccessible for cannon. “Where a goat can go, a
man can go,” he said; “where a man can go, he can haul up a gun.” The
cannon was put in place and commanded the fort. St. Clair, seeing that
it was useless to resist, abandoned the fort and withdrew through the
woods to join Schuyler. At the news that Ticonderoga was taken King
George rushed into the queen’s room, exclaiming, “I have beat them; I
have beat all the Americans!”

It was impossible for the American forces to meet Burgoyne’s large,
well-equipped army in open fight. They fell back, destroying bridges,
felling trees across the roads through the ravines and swamps; the
way was so obstructed that Burgoyne’s army could march only about a
mile a day. Each day’s march took it further from its base of supplies
and weakened its forces, while each day added numbers and strength to
the patriots. An act of atrocity on the British side caused many to
join the colonial army who had hesitated before. Some Indians from
Burgoyne’s army killed and scalped Jane McCrea, a beautiful young girl
for whom they had been appointed guides. The colonists were indignant
with the English for making common cause against their own countrymen
with the savages.

At Bennington a detachment of Burgoyne’s army was attacked by General
Starke. “Before night we must conquer or Molly Starke is a widow,”
he cried, as he led his men to victory. An English force of about
two thousand men marched up the Mohawk and attacked Fort Stanwix, or
Schuyler, at the head of the river. The men in the fort prepared to
resist to the last. They cut up their shirts and cloaks to make a
flag, the Stars and Stripes, which they raised with cheers. General
Herkimer gathered the militia and went to their rescue. On the way
the militia was attacked and General Herkimer’s leg was shattered by
a bullet. Refusing to be borne from the field, he sat puffing at his
pipe and calmly directing his troops. In this battle of Oriskany both
sides sustained severe losses. The British advance was checked but they
continued to besiege Fort Schuyler.

General Schuyler called a council of war and suggested the sending of
reinforcements to the fort but the officers objected to thus weakening
the army which would have to oppose Burgoyne. Schuyler was unwilling to
leave the brave men to their fate. “Gentlemen,” he said, “I shall take
the responsibility upon myself. Where is the brigadier that will take
command of the relief? I shall beat up for volunteers to-morrow.”

Arnold, ever ready for a daring deed, offered to take charge of the
expedition. On the way he seized two Tories and sent them to the
British army to announce that large patriot forces were advancing. The
Indian allies were already discontented. At this tidings they deserted,
and the British force broke up and retreated without striking a blow.

As affairs were in this favorable condition, General Schuyler was
superseded in command. He had been blamed for the surrender of
Ticonderoga and the New England delegates, disliking him from the
first, lent a ready ear to the charges against him. Congress asked
Washington to appoint his successor, but the commander-in-chief refused
to countenance the act of injustice, and Congress appointed Gates.
Schuyler had borne the heat and burden of the campaign; now he had to
look on while the rewards of victory went to Gates.

Schuyler accepted the situation in a noble and patriotic spirit. “I am
far from insensible of the indignity of being ordered from the command
of the army at a time when an engagement must soon take place,” he
wrote to President Hancock. “It, however, gives me great consolation
that I shall have an opportunity of evincing that my conduct has been
such as deserved the thanks of my country.”

After the two battles of Saratoga the British were forced to retreat.
They were hemmed in by the American troops and, October 17, 1777,
Burgoyne and his army of five or six thousand men surrendered to Gates.
It was this victory, you remember, which led France to declare for the
colonists.

After the battle of Saratoga, Schuyler treated the prisoners with
great consideration, especially the women and children. He courteously
entertained General Burgoyne, who had had his house burned and his
estate laid waste.

“Is it to me who have done you so much injury that you show so much
kindness?” asked Burgoyne.

“That is the fate of war; let us say no more about it,” was the answer.

Later on, Schuyler insisted upon a court martial to investigate his
conduct; it acquitted him, and Congress approved the verdict “with
the highest honor.” Washington wished him to resume command but he
refused. However, he served his country ably in Congress and in the
Senate of his native state. He died in November, 1804.




Nathanael Greene


As a general Nathanael Greene ranks next to Washington in the esteem
of the American people. His father was a Quaker clergyman who lived
in Rhode Island. Nathanael as a boy worked on the farm, at the
blacksmith’s forge, and in a grist mill. He generally had a book at
hand and spent his leisure minutes in study; by his own exertions,
without ever having much schooling, he became a well-educated man. No
one would have imagined that this hard-working young Quaker, in his
drab clothes and broad-brimmed hat, was to become a fearless leader of
the patriot bands.

He was a young man when the Revolution began. He became convinced that
the battle-field must decide the cause of the colonists, and, despite
the Quaker views in which he had been trained, he wished to join the
fight for freedom. As soon as he heard of the battles of Lexington
and Concord, he started to Boston to take the part of his oppressed
countrymen. When the Continental army was organized, Rhode Island voted
to raise sixteen hundred men to be commanded by Greene.

For four years he served in the north, winning the esteem and
confidence of Washington. He was with Washington in the retreat
through New Jersey and aided in the brilliant attacks at Trenton and
Princeton. In the battle of Brandywine he saved the day. His troops
were stationed in the rear; as the retreating forces fell back, at
Greene’s command the ranks opened and let them pass, then closed again.
Thus he kept his troops formed in line of battle and held the British
army in check, till night came; then he withdrew to the main army. In
the battle of Germantown, too, Greene bore a brave part, and by his
courage and endurance he cheered Washington during the dark days at
Valley Forge.

During the first years of the war the north was the battle field. The
south was almost unmolested except for the attack in 1776 on Fort
Moultrie which was gallantly defended. In December, 1778, however,
General Clinton sent thirty-five hundred men by sea from New York;
these troops easily captured Savannah which was defended by only six
hundred men. The British forces made themselves masters of the country
defended only by scattered bands of patriots. In the spring of 1780,
Clinton himself with eight thousand men went by sea to Charleston and
captured the city. Leaving Cornwallis to complete the conquest of the
South, Clinton returned to the north. It seemed as if the southern
colonies were to be torn from the patriots.

In this emergency General Gates was sent to take command in the south.
By overcoming Burgoyne with the army prepared by Schuyler and led by
Morgan and Arnold, he had won fame and popularity, and was regarded
as equal or superior to Washington. He was defeated at Camden by
Cornwallis with a smaller force. Gates led the retreat, or stampede, of
the militia, while a brave German, De Kalb, with one-third of the army
stood at bay against the whole British army and met an honorable death.
“We look on America as at our feet,” said an English statesman when the
news of this battle was received in England.

But it was a general not a people which the English had defeated.
The brave settlers on the frontier rallied in their own defense. In
October, 1780, they surrounded Ferguson’s troops at King’s Mountain,
captured or killed the entire force, and disbanded before the English
could attack them. “A numerous army appeared on the frontier drawn from
Nolachucky and other settlements beyond the mountains whose very names
had been unknown to us,” wrote Lord Rawdon.

Two months later, December, 1780, a general was sent to the southern
colonies who was worthy of the troops he was to command. This was
Greene. The outlook was not promising. Without provisions, military
stores, or clothing, and lacking means to provide them, Greene took
charge of an army of about two thousand starving, ragged men. Opposed
to him were well-disciplined, well-provisioned troops. But his brave
soldiers were commanded by such men as William Washington, Morgan,
“Light Horse Harry” Lee, Marion, and Sumpter. The patriots were cheered
by the victory of Cowpens, won by Morgan’s men, January 17, 1781, over
the bold and savage Tarleton.

Greene was not able to withstand the large and well-equipped British
army; as Cornwallis approached, he fell back, going northward. By
looking at a map, you can see the position of the troops. Behind them
were three rivers, the Catawba, the Yadkin, and the Dan. The patriots’
effort was to keep a river between them and their enemy; the British
endeavor was to overtake the little American army between two rivers,
where it would be easy to destroy it. The march became a race for the
rivers. Cornwallis destroyed the baggage of the army, beginning with
his own personal luggage, and his men marched as light infantry. The
patriots hurried on through the mud and rain, over the snow and frozen
roads; for them it was a march for life and death; the men were allowed
three hours’ sleep and they had but one meal a day. They pressed on,
crossed the Catawba in safety, and in safety crossed the Yadkin; unless
they were overtaken before they reached the Dan, they would be safe.
Cornwallis thought that they would seek the fords of the Dan and he
marched in that direction; Greene, however, hurried toward a ford where
boats were collected and the army crossed the river. After a vain march
of two hundred and fifty miles, in which his losses had been greater
than in battle, Cornwallis was compelled to retrace his steps. He
said of his opponent: “Greene is as dangerous as Washington,--he is
vigilant, enterprising, and full of resources.”

Greene received reinforcements; though most of them were raw and
untrained men, he knew that a battle must be risked while his ranks
were full. He marched back to Guilford Court House, where a battle
was fought, March, 1781. The raw troops were not able to withstand
the attack of the British regulars, and the patriots were defeated.
Though defeated, Greene remained in control of much of North Carolina;
Cornwallis went northward, entered Virginia, and advanced to his fate
at Yorktown. Greene’s troops were attacked at Hobkirk’s Hill, April,
1781, and defeated by Lord Rawdon who had succeeded Cornwallis in
command. The men deserted the guns and it was not until Greene himself
rushed forward and seized the ropes that the men rallied to drag off
the precious artillery.

That fall, in the fiercely-contested battle of Eutaw Springs, Greene
held his own. Though he won few decisive victories in pitched battle
against the British regulars, he gradually drove the enemy from Georgia
and the Carolinas, till only a few fortified towns were left in their
control. Greene drew his lines closer and closer around Charleston and
at last the British were forced to evacuate the city. This really ended
the war in the south.

When peace was declared in 1783, Greene returned to his home in Rhode
Island. Two years later, he went to Georgia to make his home on an
estate there which was presented to him as a reward for his gallant
services. He did not long survive to enjoy his well-won fame, dying in
June, 1786.




John Paul Jones

Our First Naval Hero


The American army during the Revolution was, for the most part, led by
native Americans; the officers of English birth were for one reason
and another less popular and less successful than the Americans.
This, however, was not the case with the American navy, created and
manned to meet the exigency of the time. The twenty-six vessels did
valiant service, capturing during the first two years of the war eight
hundred merchantmen and gaining many brilliant victories. The man whose
achievements shed most luster upon it was a Briton.

John Paul, known to us as Paul Jones, was the son of a Scotch gardener.
In childhood he showed a love for the sea and he became a sailor
when he was twelve years old. One of his first long voyages was on a
ship which came to Virginia for a cargo of tobacco. He studied naval
history and tactics, though he remained in the merchant-service. There
he rose in rank, until he became captain of a trading-vessel. When
he was about twenty-five, his brother, who had settled in Virginia,
died and John Paul, for by this name he was still known, took charge
of his estate. He does not seem to have been a successful farmer, and
he led an uneventful life until the Revolution began. Then he offered
his services to Congress. We do not know why he cast his lot with his
adopted country instead of his native one, but he gave it faithful and
brilliant service, without pay or allowance.

From this time, however, he dropped his real name of John Paul and
chose to be known as John Paul Jones--perhaps because he did not wish
his friends and countrymen to know that he was aiding the “rebel” cause.

He was at first appointed to a subordinate position. In the early part
of 1776 the first American squadron, with Paul Jones first lieutenant
on one of its vessels, the Alfred, sailed to the Bahama Islands. Its
mission was to take the military supplies so needed by the Americans
from the forts on New Providence. The Americans were unable to enter
the harbor, and the expedition would have been a failure but for Paul
Jones. He had been informed that there was a good landing near the
harbor, and he undertook to guide the Alfred to it. He did so and the
other ships followed. They seized the military stores, including a
hundred cannon, and sailed back to America.

Soon after this Paul Jones was given charge of a little sloop and sent
to sea on a six-weeks’ cruise. He had encounters with several English
frigates and on more than one occasion his vessel was saved only by his
courage and seamanship. At the end of his cruise he returned to Newport
with sixty-six prizes. The gallant and successful captain was deprived
of command by a jealous superior officer and for several months he
was without a ship. He repeatedly asked Congress for a ship and he
requested that it might be a good one, “for I intend to go in harm’s
way,” he said--and he generally carried out his intention.

While on shore Jones gave Congress valuable advice about fitting out a
navy. He recommended that “1. Every officer should be examined before
he receives his commission. 2. The ranks in a navy should correspond
to those in an army. 3. As England has the best navy in the world, we
should copy hers.”

In June, 1777, he was put in command of the Ranger and over this he
hoisted, for the first time on the seas, the American flag, the Stars
and Stripes, lately adopted by Congress. He thought that the most
effective way to wage war was to “carry it into the enemy’s country.”
Accordingly he went to Whitehaven on the English coast, where nearly
three hundred vessels were in harbor. He took his men ashore in two
boats and ordered them to set fire to the ships, while he surprised the
two batteries and the fort and spiked their cannon. When he returned
to the harbor, he found that his orders had been disobeyed,--not one
ship had been fired. It was now day and the people were aroused, but
Paul Jones was unwilling to go without carrying out a part of his plan
and with his own hand he set fire to the largest ship.

The English made many attempts to seize the doer of this daring deed,
and at one time there were forty-two British ships on the waters
seeking to capture the bold rover. One of the ships which set out to
capture the Ranger was the Drake. Jones met it in battle and defeated
and captured the English vessel which had more guns and better-trained
and better-equipped men than his.

The Ranger was recalled to defend the coast of America, and for months
Paul Jones was in France without a ship. At last he was given an
old trading-vessel fitted out as a war-ship. He called it Bon Homme
Richard, the French name for Poor Richard in honor of his friend
Franklin’s Poor Richard of the almanac. In September, 1779, Commodore
Jones sailed toward the English coast with four small vessels. There he
met two large English war-ships that were convoying, or accompanying,
a fleet of forty merchant-vessels. The merchant-vessels took refuge on
the English coast, and the war-ships advanced to fight. The shots of
the English ship, the Serapis, inflicted so much injury on the Richard
that Captain Pearson of the Serapis thought it was sinking and asked
the American commander, “Has your ship struck?”

“I have not yet begun to fight,” was Jones’s stern reply.

He had the two vessels lashed together. Then, with his own hands
helping to work the guns, he directed the fight with dauntless
resolution. His ship was riddled with shot and on fire; still he
refused to yield; when the vessel seemed sinking, he drove his
prisoners to the pumps and made them work for life itself. One of his
ships, instead of coming to his aid, fired on him. His situation seemed
desperate. Captain Pearson called again to know if he had struck and he
answered, “No,--that if he could do no better he would sink with his
colors flying.”

After a deadly combat of three-and-a-half hours, in which the Serapis
and the Richard literally “shot each other to pieces,” the Serapis had
to yield. The king conferred on Captain Pearson the honor of knighthood
as a reward for his brave, though unsuccessful, fight. When Jones heard
of this he said that if ever he met Pearson at sea again he would make
a lord of him. After the Revolution in which he served America so
bravely and ably, Jones made his home in France. There in 1792 ended
his adventurous life in which he had, as he said, “twenty-three battles
and solemn rencounters by sea.”




Thomas Jefferson

The Author of the Declaration of Independence


Not all the work of securing American independence was done by the able
generals and the brave soldiers. The patriot cause in the Revolution
owed much to men who never served in the army. One of these was
Franklin, who secured for the colonies aid and recognition from France.
Another was Thomas Jefferson, called “the pen of the Revolution,” who
wrote the Declaration of Independence.

Thomas Jefferson was born in Virginia, in 1743; his father, a wealthy
country gentleman, died when Thomas was about fourteen years old. The
country boy divided his time between books and outdoor sports, and
his mind was well-trained and his slender frame was as active and as
tireless as an Indian’s. Then at seventeen he rode off to Williamsburg
to enter William and Mary College.

At Williamsburg was formed the friendship with Patrick Henry which
continued till after the Revolution; it was broken by differences in
political opinions. It was on a flyleaf of one of Thomas Jefferson’s
law books that Henry wrote his “resolutions.” Jefferson was one of the
audience that listened entranced to the eloquent speech against the
Stamp Act. When Jefferson was twenty-four, he was admitted to practice
law at Williamsburg. He became an able and successful lawyer, though
he had a weak voice and was never a pleasing speaker. In 1775 Jefferson
heard Patrick Henry’s eloquent appeal to the people to arm for the
inevitable conflict; Jefferson, Washington, and others were appointed
to form plans to put Virginia on a military basis.

[Illustration: THOMAS JEFFERSON]

Jefferson, who had already won reputation as author and scholar, was
sent to Philadelphia to the Continental Congress. Though one of the
youngest of its members, he was appointed to draft the Declaration
of Independence. The paper was accepted and adopted in form slightly
changed from that in which he presented it. The delegates who signed it
well knew that they were signing their death warrants if the Revolution
should prove a failure and they should fall into King George’s hands.

Hancock, the president of the Congress, said that the members must all
hang together.

“Yes,” said Franklin, “we must hang together or we shall all hang
separately.”

Four days later, the Declaration was read publicly, and its
proclamation was received with enthusiasm throughout the colonies.

Jefferson was one of the five men that the Assembly selected to revise
the Virginia laws; upon him devolved most of the work. It was due to
him that severe laws were passed against dueling, and that there was
repealed the old English law by which the eldest son inherited the
father’s estate. For nine years he and other enlightened men fought for
the repeal of the old intolerant laws about religion, and the passing
of a statute securing religious liberty. Finally, all the old laws
about tithes, compulsory worship, etc., were struck out and in their
place was substituted this statute written by Jefferson:

“No man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious
worship, ministry, or place whatsoever; nor shall he be enforced,
restrained, molested or hindered in his body or his goods; nor shall
he otherwise suffer on account of his religious opinions or beliefs;
but all men shall be free to profess and by argument to maintain,
their opinions in matters of religion; and the same shall in no wise
diminish, enlarge or affect their civil capacities.” We accept this as
a matter of course, but in that day it was a great step forward.

Jefferson was elected governor of Virginia, but he resigned in 1781,
feeling that in the emergency of the time the government could best be
administered by having civil and military power in the same hands. He
was asked by Congress to go with Franklin to France as ambassador but
he refused because his wife was ill. After her death, two years later,
he went as minister to France. No other American ambassador was ever so
popular as Franklin, but Jefferson was liked and respected.

“You replace Dr. Franklin,” said a Frenchman.

“I merely succeed him; no one could replace him,” was the prompt reply.

Jefferson, like Franklin, was a many-sided man. The famous author of
the Declaration of Independence, the scholar versed in the Greek,
Latin, French, Italian, and Spanish languages, took a keen interest in
practical matters and applied science. Under great difficulties, he
procured some of the best rice of Italy and sent it to South Carolina;
from this handful came the great rice crops produced in that state.
From Europe Franklin sent to the United States the first announcement
of Watt’s steam engine which he went from Paris to London to see. He
wrote back that by it “a peck and a half of coal performs as much work
as a horse in a day.” Jefferson himself had inventive talent; among
his other inventions was a plow superior to any then in use, which in
1790 received a gold medal in France. He became the third president
of the American Philosophical Society of which Franklin was the first
president.

Jefferson returned to America in 1789 and served as Secretary of State
under Washington. He had succeeded in getting our present coinage
system adopted, urging successfully a decimal system to replace that
of England which many people wished to retain. He tried to have
introduced a system of measures founded on the same decimal plan, but
in this he did not succeed. While he was Secretary of State the mint
in Philadelphia was established by his advice; till then American money
had been coined in Europe.

In 1793 Jefferson resigned the office of Secretary of State and
returned to his beloved home, Monticello, one of the handsomest country
seats in Virginia. His overseer said that in the twenty years he lived
at Monticello, he saw Jefferson sitting unemployed only twice--both
times he was too unwell to work. “At all other times he was either
reading, writing, talking, working upon some model, or doing something
else.” Once Jefferson’s little grandsons whom he urged to “learn” and
“labor” replied that they would not need to work because they would
be rich. He answered, “Ah, those that expect to get through the world
without industry, because they are rich, will be greatly mistaken. The
people that do the work will soon get possession of all their property.”

One of his grandsons tells another incident of these days: “On riding
out with him when a lad we met a negro who bowed to us; he returned his
bow, I did not. Turning to me he asked, ‘Do you permit a negro to be
more of a gentleman than yourself?’”

The country did not permit Jefferson to remain long in retirement.
He was elected Vice President in 1796 and President in 1801. He
represented the party of the people; this was opposed to the
Federalist party led by Hamilton which was in favor of a centralized
government. The party led by Jefferson was called, first Republican,
then Democratic-Republican, then Democratic--to express the idea that
the power belonged to the people. Scholar and aristocrat as Jefferson
was, he had confidence in the “government of the people, by the people,
and for the people,” as a man of the people expressed it later.
Throughout Jefferson’s life this was his main idea, and the one for
which he always worked.

During his first administration he rendered a great service to the
country; being instrumental in 1803 in purchasing from France for
fifteen million dollars the Louisiana territory. This territory
included not only Louisiana but the territory extending to Puget
Sound. In a message to Congress, Jefferson asked for money to send an
expedition to explore this great country and he selected two brave and
hardy frontiersmen to lead it, Captain Lewis and Lieutenant Clarke.
They spent two and a half years on the expedition and brought back
information about the country and specimens of its products.

After he had served his country twice as president, Jefferson retired
to his home at Monticello and there spent his old age, still occupied
with schemes for the public welfare. He believed in America for
Americans. In a letter to President Monroe he said, “Our first and
fundamental maxim should be never to entangle ourselves in the broils
of Europe. Our second never to suffer Europe to intermeddle with
Cis-Atlantic affairs.”

He planned an educational system for Virginia which included a
comprehensive free school system, and a university. He gave years of
thought and study to planning the building, government, and course of
study of this university. In 1818 the state legislature made a grant to
establish the University of Virginia.

Jefferson gave practically his whole life to the service of his
country. He was in office thirty-nine years, and spent more than twenty
years revising the Virginia Statutes and laboring to establish the
University of Virginia. Thus, he said, his public services occupied
over sixty years. During this time, his private affairs were neglected.
From wealth in youth, he was reduced in old age to straitened
circumstances. He sold his library, thirteen thousand volumes, to
Congress for $23,950, about one-half of its auction value, and the
money went to his creditors.

In the summer of 1826 Jefferson was taken ill. At midnight July the
third, he was heard to murmur, “This is the fourth of July.” About
midday he died, fifty years after the Declaration of Independence was
adopted. On the same day in Massachusetts was dying John Adams who had
helped in the fight for the people’s rights. During his last hours,
his thoughts turned to his great associate and he said, “Thomas
Jefferson still lives.”

On Jefferson’s tombstone were recorded as he had requested--not
the offices he had held nor the honors he had received--but the
three things by which he wished to be remembered,--that he wrote
the Declaration of Independence, the Virginia Statute for religious
liberty, and founded the University of Virginia.




Alexander Hamilton

The Founder of the Federalist Party


The Democratic-Republican party which believed in the “power of the
masses” and the rule of the people was founded by Thomas Jefferson.
The Federalist party, which believed in a centralized government
patterned on the aristocratic one of England, was founded by Alexander
Hamilton. Little is known about the family and early life of Hamilton.
He was born in the little West India island of Nevis in January, 1757.
His father is supposed to have been a Scotch trader and his mother
a Frenchwoman. His family was poor, and it was necessary for him to
leave school in childhood and set to work. At the age of twelve, he
became a clerk in a counting-house where he remained about three years.
Every spare moment was spent in the study of mathematics, chemistry,
and history. He was so faithful in his work, however, that at the age
of thirteen or fourteen he was left in charge of business during his
employer’s absence.

[Illustration: ALEXANDER HAMILTON]

In 1772 the island of Santa Cruz was visited by a terrible hurricane;
young Hamilton wrote such a vivid and eloquent account of it that his
friends thought he ought to become a professional man and offered to
help him continue his education. Accordingly, in October, 1772, he set
sail to the colonies. Leaving the West Indies, he cut loose from his
old life; of friends and relatives there, almost nothing is heard after
this time. Young Hamilton attended a grammar school in New Jersey, and
then entered King’s College, now Columbia University, in New York. The
young West Indian came to America at a time when people were greatly
excited about political matters, and he heard much about the Stamp
Act and the oppressive taxes laid by Great Britain. At first he took
the part of the king, but in less than two years he had become an
enthusiastic patriot. It was the cause of the colonies as a whole that
appealed to him. He never developed any of the feeling for the separate
colonies which was so strong in most native-born Americans.

When he espoused the cause of the oppressed colonies, he did it
with his whole heart. The precocious, clever boy of seventeen made
patriotic addresses, and published an able pamphlet, entitled, “A Full
Vindication of the Measures of Congress from the Calumnies of their
Enemies” (1774). In this pamphlet he stated the case of the colonies
clearly and eloquently. He said, “All men have one common origin; they
participate in one common nature, and consequently have one common
right. No reason can be advanced why one man should exercise any power
or preëminence over his fellow-creatures, unless they have voluntarily
vested him with it. Since then, Americans have not by any act of their
own empowered the British Parliament to make laws for them, it follows
that they can have no just authority to do it.”

Hamilton believed in the enforcement of law and order. On one or two
occasions, when mobs had set out to attack royalists’ houses, he
persuaded them to respect private property and opinions.

The opinions that young Hamilton upheld with pen he was ready to
uphold with sword. In 1776, when he was only nineteen, he was put in
charge of a company of artillery which he drilled so well that he won
the commendation and friendship first of General Greene and later of
General Washington. During the retreat through New Jersey, he managed
his company with courage and skill, and he fought bravely in the
battles of Trenton and Princeton. In 1777 he became one of Washington’s
“official family,” being made his confidential secretary. Washington
was very fond of the clever young man whom he often addressed as
“my boy.” Hamilton’s ability, too, was recognized and in 1777 he
was entrusted with a delicate and important mission. This was to
get reinforcements for Washington’s hard-pressed army from Gates’s
successful forces. As superior officer, Washington could have ordered
the troops sent to his relief, but for many reasons it was best to have
them sent on Gates’s own accord, if possible. Therefore, Washington
gave Hamilton a sealed order of command to Gates, instructing him not
to deliver it if without doing so he could persuade the general to send
the troops. Hamilton brought back the troops and he also brought back
the unopened letter. It was while he was in New York on this errand
that he met General Schuyler’s daughter whom he married in 1780.

Hamilton did not remain in the commander-in-chief’s official family.
On one occasion he failed to answer a summons promptly; General
Washington, who was a strict disciplinarian, said, “Colonel Hamilton,
you have kept me waiting for you these ten minutes. I must tell you,
sir, that you treat me with disrespect.” The hot-tempered youth
replied, “I am not conscious of it, sir, but since you have thought it
necessary to tell me so, we part.”

“Very well, sir, if that is your choice,” answered the general.

Washington was willing to overlook the occurrence, but Hamilton was
desirous to return to active service. At Yorktown he led a gallant
attack against a British redoubt which he took in ten minutes.

After the Revolution, he read law four months and then began to
practice in Albany. He put aside professional work to serve his adopted
country again. This time in Congress. The colonies which had united
in their war of defence now seemed drifting apart and the general
government had no power to hold them together. The country was in
debt and had neither money nor credit. The states, therefore, sent
representatives to Philadelphia in 1787 to form a Constitution to take
the place of the Articles of Confederation.

Hamilton was one of these delegates. He argued in favor of a strong
central government, ruled by a president, congress, and supreme court;
he thought that practically all power should be put in the hands of
the general government, and that the governors of states should be
appointed by it and should have veto power over state legislation.
To him an American state was a mere geographical division, like an
English county. Most of the people, however, clung to the independence
of the separate states, and there was heated discussion as to what
rights should be delegated to the general government and what should
be reserved by the states. At last a constitution was drawn up, in
favor of which Congress voted. It was decided that this constitution
should go into effect as soon as it should be ratified by nine states.
As yet the states “had given up none of their rights to the general
government.”

In order to present the views in favor of this constitution and to
secure its adoption, Hamilton, with some assistance from Madison and
Jay, published a series of eighty-five papers called “The Federalist.”
The constitution was adopted, and George Washington was elected first
President. When he formed his Cabinet he made Alexander Hamilton
Secretary of the Treasury. It was felt that this young man of
thirty-two could do more than any one else to establish the finances
of the country on a safe basis. He made a report “On the Public
Credit” which “laid the corner-stone of American finance under the
constitution.”

He insisted that the credit of the United States should be firmly
established and the United States should assume the war debt of
fifty-four million dollars; to secure the payment of this a national
bank was established. Hamilton suggested ways in which money might be
raised by taxing whiskey and imported articles and by the use of public
lands, the Northwest Territory ceded by Virginia, and the western
lands ceded by Maryland, New York, Massachusetts, Connecticut, South
Carolina, North Carolina, and Georgia.

After some opposition Hamilton’s plan was adopted and the finances of
the country were established on a safe basis. An insurrection called
the Whiskey Rebellion was raised in Pennsylvania by people who were
unwilling to pay the tax on liquor, and Hamilton went with troops who
suppressed it.

Jefferson and others argued that under this constitution the general
government had no power to establish a national bank. Hamilton brought
forward the view, which he was the first to advance, that Congress had
“implied” powers as well as “delegated” ones. One of his chief motives
in urging national banks was that he felt they would be a “powerful
cement of union,” uniting the business interests of the country in the
support of the government. It was Hamilton, then, who originated the
“protective tariff” and “national banks,” over which political parties
are still contending.

In 1795 after his national policies were adopted, Hamilton resigned
public life and began to practice his profession in New York. He put
aside his brilliant and profitable professional work, however, when
war with France seemed imminent, in order to assist Washington in his
plans for the organization of the army. When the war-cloud passed he
resumed the practice of his profession. But his brilliant life was to
come to an early and untimely end. In his political life he made many
antagonists. One of these was Aaron Burr, as brilliant and hot-tempered
as Hamilton, and a man of bold and dangerous ambition.

After a political quarrel, Burr challenged Hamilton to fight a duel.
In theory Hamilton recognized the sin and folly of dueling, but he
was not willing to refuse to fight for fear people would think he was
a coward. Early one morning, July 11, 1804, the two rivals met in a
quiet spot. Hamilton fired into the air, as he had said he would do;
Burr with deadly skill aimed straight at his opponent who fell fatally
wounded. Hamilton left his mourning country the record of a brilliant
public career, the main purpose of which was to strengthen the general
government and to consolidate the Union.




Daniel Boone

The Pioneer of Kentucky


During colonial days, the English settlers occupied the land east of
the Alleghany Mountains. Except on expeditions of war or explorations
and adventure, they did not cross the mountains to the west. During the
latter part of the eighteenth century, the first pioneer went westward
to settle, taking with him his wife and daughter, the first white women
to make their homes in the western land. This pioneer was Daniel Boone.
He was born in Pennsylvania in 1735, and so was three years younger
than George Washington.

Boone’s father moved to North Carolina in 1752 and there Daniel grew
to manhood. His school days were brief and his book-learning was
limited. There was standing many years a tree on which was carved in
rude letters, “D. Boon Cilled A Bar on this tree year 1760.” But he was
expert in the homely, hardy work of the frontier, and in woodcraft;
familiar with the life and habits of the wild things of the wood;
a sure quick shot, a fearless and self-reliant youth. One who knew
him later says he was “honest of heart and liberal--in short, one of
nature’s noblemen. He abhorred a mean action and delighted in honesty
and truth. He never delighted in the shedding of human blood, even that
of his enemies in war. His remarkable quality was an unwavering and
invincible fortitude.”

Boone was an expert hunter and trapper. Like many American
frontiersmen, he wore a dress resembling that of the Indians,--a
buckskin hunting shirt with fringed buckskin leggings and moccasins
of deerskin or buffalo-hide. His inseparable companion was his
long-barrelled rifle.

He went as a wagoner on Braddock’s ill-fated expedition and barely
escaped with his life.

The country west of the mountains had been visited and explored by
several men and parties. Gist, who accompanied Washington on his
mission to the French forts, was one of these early explorers. Another
was John Finley who traded with the Indians on the Red River of
Kentucky. He told Boone about the fertile soil, the abundant game, and
the “salt licks” of the western lands.

After a short hunting trip on the borders, Boone started out, in May,
1769, to explore “the far-famed but little-known land of Kentucky.” He
started with five companions and he spent two years roaming over the
country. The white men were attacked by Indians in the fall of 1769 and
Boone and Stewart were captured. A week later they made their escape,
but were unable to find their friends. Not long after, Boone’s brother
and another frontiersman joined them with a welcome supply of powder
and lead.

Their companions were killed by the Indians, and the Boone brothers
spent some months in the wilderness in a cabin which they built of
poles and bark. For some reason his brother went home, and Daniel Boone
remained for months alone, the only white man in that wilderness which
was the battle-ground of northern and southern Indians. Not even a dog
was there to keep him company, and as food, he had only what his rifle
and fishing-rod could secure.

Undaunted by loneliness or wildness, by lurking beast or hostile
savages, Boone determined to bring his family to this fair and fertile
land. He felt that he had a work to do, “God had appointed him an
instrument for the settlement of the wilderness.” Several families set
out with the Boone brothers, driving their cattle and conveying their
household goods in wagons. They were attacked by Indians and the others
became so discouraged that they turned back.

Boone, however, was undaunted. In 1775, as agent of a North Carolina
company, he founded Boonesborough, a stockade or station near a
salt lick on the Kentucky River. This was near the present site of
Frankfort. Thither came his wife and daughter, the first women pioneers
in Kentucky. The Indians strove to drive back the white men from
their hunting-grounds, and this fort became the center of savage and
relentless warfare.

At one time three little girls, one of whom was Boone’s daughter, were
captured by the Indians. The settlers marched to rescue them, and did
so, it is said, after a long journey and a fierce struggle in which
Boone and a companion were captured.

In 1778, Boone with a small party of men left the settlement to get
a supply of salt. They were surrounded by a large band of Indians
and carried north. Boone was taken as far as the present site of
Detroit. He remained with the savages several months without having an
opportunity to let his family know his fate. Learning that the Indian
warriors were preparing to attack the Kentucky settlements, he managed
to escape and made his way two hundred miles southward, through the
wilderness swarming with enemies, in time to warn the settlements and
to help defend Boonesborough against attack. His family, thinking him
dead, had returned to North Carolina. He followed them and returned
with them to his chosen home a few months later.

For years there was almost constant warfare against the Indians in the
“Dark and Bloody Ground,” as Kentucky was well called. It is said
within seven years--from 1783 to 1790--fifteen hundred whites were
killed or taken captive in Kentucky.

In 1792 Kentucky, which had been a county of Virginia, was made a
state; at this time Boone’s title to his land was found defective. In
his old age he was deprived of his small share of the great country he
had helped to settle and open to the English.

He moved west to the country owned by Spain, and stopped near the
present site of St. Louis. The Spanish governor granted him about eight
thousand acres of land. When this territory was sold to the United
States, his title was upset and he was deprived of this estate also.

This typical American pioneer died in 1820.




Oliver Hazard Perry and Thomas Macdonough

Two Naval Commanders in the War of 1812


The war of 1812 was brought about by the war between the French and
English in Europe. France and England each issued orders forbidding
trade with the other. Both claimed the right to confiscate all vessels
that engaged in trade with its rival. The English claimed also the
right to search American vessels for British seamen; and they seized
hundreds of men, many of whom were not English seamen at all but
Americans.

In order to avoid war, instead of resisting these unjust demands at
once, the United States passed the Embargo Act, forbidding American
vessels to sail to any foreign country; this act occasioned discontent
and was soon repealed; only trade with England was forbidden. The
English impressments of American seamen continued until finally America
had to fight for her rights. War was declared, June 18, 1812. Most of
the American victories in this war were won at sea. The most famous of
the naval commanders was Perry.

Oliver Hazard Perry was the descendant of an English Quaker, who came
to America about the middle of the seventeenth century to enjoy the
free exercise of his religion. He went first to Plymouth where Quakers
were disliked; finally he purchased a tract of land in Roger Williams’
Rhode Island colony and settled there. Here his descendants remained
and here Oliver Hazard Perry was born in 1785. His father served in the
American navy during the Revolution and became so fond of the sea that
he continued his voyages as captain of a merchant-vessel.

Oliver was sent first to a school near his home. A few years later his
parents moved from South Kingston to Newport to give their children the
advantage of better schools. The war between England and France was now
going on, and it seemed at this time as if America would be drawn into
war against France. President Adams, therefore, resolved to establish
a navy. Captain Perry was given command of a vessel called the General
Greene, the business of which was to defend American merchant-vessels
trading with the West Indies. Oliver, now thirteen, begged his father
to let him enter the navy. Permission was granted, and Oliver became a
midshipman on his father’s vessel.

After danger of war with France was over, young Perry still continued
in the navy. His next service was in the Mediterranean against the
Barbary States. These states,--Tunis, Algiers, Tripoli, and Morocco--on
the north coast of Africa, had for hundreds of years made a business
of piracy. They captured vessels, and used or sold the stores and sold
the crews into slavery. America, like England and other countries, for
years bribed them not to molest its vessels. At last the Americans
determined, instead of paying tribute, longer, to send a fleet to the
Barbary coast and force the pirates to respect the American flag.
Oliver Perry was on a ship sent in 1802. The fleet cruised about and
did little fighting and his ship was recalled to America in 1803.

The most daring deed of the war was performed by a young American
lieutenant, Stephen Decatur. An American ship, the Philadelphia, had
fallen into the hands of the Barbary pirates and Lieutenant Decatur
went into the harbor with a few men in a boat and set fire to the
vessel to prevent its being manned by the Tripolitans. The Barbary
ruler finally made a treaty of peace with the United States. In the
war Perry had had no special opportunity to distinguish himself, but he
had proved himself brave and efficient.

When the war against England began in 1812, it seemed that American
chances for sea victory were small. England, the mistress of the seas,
had a large, well-equipped navy; the American fleet was far inferior
in numbers and in size. But the Americans had brave seamen who won
some brilliant victories. One of the greatest of these was that of the
American vessel the Constitution over the English Guerriére.

The command of the Great Lakes was very important; being on the
boundary between the United States and the English colony of Canada,
they controlled the entrance to each country. When the war opened, the
English had a naval force on the Great Lakes, the Americans had none. A
fleet could not be made ready without delay, and an American army under
General Hull was sent to invade Canada. General Hull surrendered the
fort at Detroit without attempting to defend it, and the English took
also Fort Dearborn, on the site of Chicago.

To protect the northern coast, Lieutenant Oliver Perry was sent to
build a fleet on Lake Erie and to fight the British there. This was
a great undertaking. There was no railroad or canal connecting the
western with the eastern part of New York. Nails, sails, guns, powder,
shot, and supplies of all kinds had to be carried on ox wagons along
the rough roads and on boats up the streams. Perry did not lose time
bemoaning the difficulty of the task. The very day that he received his
orders he started carpenters to the lake; having arranged about men and
supplies, he himself set forth in the depth of winter. In the spring,
followed men bringing needed stores. In a few months Perry had a little
fleet built of trees which were standing in the forest the summer
before. “Give me men,” he wrote, “and I will acquire both for you and
for myself honor and glory on this lake, or die in the attempt.”

In September, 1813, the American ships sailed forth and the English
fleet, which was about equal in men and guns, made ready to attack.
Lieutenant Perry hoisted a flag bearing the words, “Don’t give up
the ship,” the dying speech of brave Captain Lawrence for whom the
flag-ship was named. The English attacked gallantly, and Perry’s
ship was so injured that “hammered out of his own ship,” he had
to go in a row-boat to the Niagara. With him he took his flag and
Captain Lawrence’s brave words waved as a signal from the Niagara.
The Americans raked the English decks with a deadly broadside. The
British fought bravely till their ships were crippled and most of their
officers and many of their men were wounded. Then the whole squadron
was surrendered,--the first time that this fate ever befell the
British in a naval battle.

In honor of Captain Lawrence, Perry was determined that the surrender
should take place on the Lawrence, so he returned to that vessel and
there received the swords of the British officers. On the back of an
old letter he wrote his famous dispatch to General Harrison: “We have
met the enemy and they are ours--two ships, two brigs, one schooner,
and one sloop. Yours with very great respect and esteem, O. H. Perry.”
This battle of Lake Erie prevented the English and French invasion of
the United States and made it possible for the Americans to invade
Canada. Perry was made captain, then the highest rank in the American
navy. This ended his service in the war of 1812.

In 1816 Captain Perry was sent against the Algerian pirates who were
again troublesome. The ruler finally signed a treaty of peace and Perry
returned without having had to fight. Two years later, in 1819, he was
ordered to Venezuela to protest against seizures of American vessels
and to present claims for losses. He succeeded in his mission, but he
did not live to return home, dying of yellow fever on his thirty-fourth
birthday, August 23, 1819. His body was brought home in a war-vessel
and buried with military honors at Newport, Rhode Island.

Another hero of the war of 1812 was Thomas Macdonough, “the hero of
Lake Champlain,” who won a decisive victory against odds of men, guns,
and ships. Thomas Macdonough was born in Delaware and entered the navy
when he was sixteen.

In 1803 he sailed on the frigate Philadelphia bound for Tripoli.
At Gibraltar he was left in charge of a captured Moorish ship. The
Philadelphia, as you know, was taken by the Tripolitans; its crew was
kept in close confinement nearly two years. Macdonough served on board
the Enterprise, commanded by Lieutenant Stephen Decatur, and he was
one of the seventy men who captured and destroyed the Philadelphia,
which Admiral Nelson declared to be “the most bold and daring act of
the age.” For his gallantry on this occasion, Macdonough was made
lieutenant.

In 1810 he made a voyage in the merchant-service; at Liverpool he was
impressed and carried on board a British vessel, but he managed to make
his escape in the clothes of an English officer.

In 1812 Lieutenant Macdonough, then twenty-six years old, was put in
command of the naval force on Lake Champlain. You remember the old plan
of the British under Burgoyne for the invasion of New York. A similar
plan was now devised by the British and eleven thousand soldiers were
collected at the end of Lake Champlain to invade New York by way of
the lake. The English had built a fleet to convey this army. The
Americans had at the time, in 1814, only a force of about two thousand
men at Plattsburg, New York, and on the lake Lieutenant Macdonough’s
fleet of fourteen vessels, with eighty-six guns and eight hundred and
eighty-two men.

This fleet protected Plattsburg and it was necessary to destroy
it before General Prevost, the British commander, could make the
land attack. The British fleet, consisting of sixteen vessels with
ninety-two guns and nine hundred and thirty-seven men, advanced to
the attack early on the morning of September 11, 1814. Macdonough in
Plattsburg Bay awaiting the enemy. The shot of the British vessel
shattered a hen-coop on board Macdonough’s vessel; a game cock, thus
suddenly released, jumped on a gun, flapped his wings, and crowed. “The
men laughed and cheered; and immediately afterwards Macdonough himself
fired the first shot from one of the long guns.”

During the battle Macdonough worked like a common sailor at the guns
and directed the movements of his fleet with a quick eye for every
point of advantage. His ship was twice set on fire, and one by one his
guns were disabled; the damage inflicted on the British was still more
severe and some of their vessels were captured; in two and a half hours
their crippled fleet had to withdraw. The American fleet was so injured
that Lieutenant Macdonough was unable to pursue the retreating enemy.
But General Prevost was forced to retire without attacking Plattsburg
and the invasion of New York had to be given up.

From his battleship, Macdonough sent the message: “The Almighty has
been pleased to grant us a signal victory on Lake Champlain in the
capture of one frigate, one brig, and two sloops of war of the enemy.
T. Macdonough.” For this victory he was made captain.

After the war of 1812, Captain Macdonough was sent on several cruises.
In 1825 on account of ill-health he obtained permission to leave the
Mediterranean where he was stationed and return to the United States.
But he did not live to reach his native shores, dying at sea, November
10, 1825. His body was brought home and buried with military honors.




Marquis de Lafayette

A French Patriot


One of the notable figures of the eighteenth century was a French
nobleman who aided in the struggle for freedom in two countries,
America and France. This book can give only a brief sketch of his
efforts in behalf of the American patriots. By the death of his father
and mother, the Marquis de Lafayette in his youth became master of
large estates and great wealth.

But he did not settle down to a calm and selfish enjoyment of these.
He heard of the struggles of the American colonists against the
oppression of the English king and his generous heart was inspired with
interest and sympathy. Later, he said, “The moment I heard of America
I loved her: the moment I knew she was fighting for freedom, I burned
with desire of bleeding for her; and the moment I shall be able to
serve her at any time or in any part of the world, will be the happiest
one of my life.”

He was only eighteen, lately married to a young and beautiful lady
of rank and wealth equal to his own. But he turned from the gay and
luxurious court; despite the opposition of the government, he left
France and made his way to America to aid the colonists in their fight
for freedom.

He went to Philadelphia; there he was coldly received by Congress which
hesitated to give the young foreigner the position to which he was
entitled by his rank and by the promise of the American commissioner in
France. A less enthusiastic patriot might have taken offence. Lafayette
only wrote to Congress: “After the sacrifice I have made I have the
right to exact two favors; one is, to serve at my own expense, the
other is, to serve at first as a volunteer.”

His generosity was not unrewarded. Congress made him major-general; he
was soon attached to the staff of Washington and between the two there
grew to be the warmest friendship. Lafayette suffered many hardships in
the patriot cause. He was wounded in the battle of Brandywine while
leading his troops; he bore without a murmur the privations of Valley
Forge, and fought gallantly in the battle of Monmouth.

In 1779 Lafayette went to France for a few months; it was largely
through his influence that land and naval forces were sent to the
aid of America. France formed an alliance with America and aided the
patriots chiefly because she hated England and wished revenge for the
loss of her northern colonies. The young French officer, however, was
inspired by love for the cause of freedom.

In 1781 he was sent in command of twelve hundred New England soldiers
to help the Virginians against the invading Cornwallis who had about
five thousand men. “The boy cannot escape me,” said Cornwallis when
he heard of Lafayette’s approach. But “the boy” managed to keep out
of reach, until he was so reinforced that when he offered battle
Cornwallis withdrew. It was now Lafayette’s turn to pursue and
Cornwallis’s to retreat. At Yorktown the British were hemmed in by
the American army under Lafayette on one side and the French fleet on
the other, until Washington’s forces came up. The siege and capture
of Yorktown followed, and Lafayette who had contributed largely to
the success of the campaign was publicly thanked by Washington. In
December, 1781, the young nobleman returned to his home in France.

A few years later the French began their struggle for liberty, the
famous French Revolution. The Marquis de Lafayette drew up a famous
“declaration of rights,” modeled after the Declaration of Independence,
and drew his sword again in the cause of the people. The great French
prison, the Bastile, regarded as the stronghold of tyranny, was taken,
and its key was sent by Lafayette to Washington.

Lafayette wanted freedom but not license for his countrymen, and he
lost favor with the violent republican party. At last, sick of anarchy
in the name of liberty, he left France, intending to come to America.
He was seized by the Austrian authorities, and for five years was kept
in close and cruel imprisonment.

In 1824 Lafayette, an old and broken man who had been deprived of
wealth and property, came to visit the young republic for which he had
fought. He was received as the nation’s guest, the people’s friend; he
went from Boston to New Orleans, welcomed and honored at every turn. He
made a pilgrimage to Mount Vernon to visit the tomb of his “great good
friend,” Washington. In Boston he laid the corner-stone of the Bunker
Hill monument. Congress voted him a grant of two hundred thousand
dollars and an American vessel was sent to convey him home. The United
States joined France in lamenting the death of this great patriot in
1834.




Some American Improvements and Inventions


Franklin, the first great typical American, was interested in
science,--not so much the abstract principles as the practical
application of those principles so as to increase the comfort and
well-being of people. This was true, also, of Jefferson, another great
typical American. From those days to the present time, this practical
turn has been characteristic of American talent. Sometimes it has been
said in reproach that America stands for progress in material ways,
that her men of science care, not for abstract truth, but for its
market value.

Let us remember, however, that whenever a great cause or principle has
needed support, Americans have always risen to the occasion. Material
progress and business ability are good things, if only we do not
overestimate their value in comparison with others.

In so large a country as America, the question of methods of travel
and means of transportation was of course important from the first.
Water-ways were the natural and most convenient mode of communication.
If you will look on a map of the colonies, you will see how the
settlements clung to water-lines--ocean, lake, and river.

Before the Revolution, men went to and fro as they had done for
hundreds even thousands of years. On the water they traveled by slow
boats, propelled by oars or sails. On the land they journeyed on foot,
or horseback, or in rude vehicles, over roads which were generally
rough and bad and often dangerous.

It was so expensive to carry goods to and fro that their carriage
within the limits of a state might cost more than the value of the
goods. It cost, for instance, two dollars and a half a bushel to carry
salt three hundred miles in the state of New York. People who moved
from the eastern to the western part of the state could not afford to
carry their household goods. They had to be carried by boat from New
York to Albany, hauled to Schenectady, carried in boats up the Mohawk
River and on a small canal to Utica, then hauled overland to Rome, and
carried again in boats down a small canal and creek to Oneida Lake,
thence by water to Lake Ontario.

During the early part of the nineteenth century, in three ways travel
and hauling were made easier and cheaper. The simplest of these was by
the extensive use of canals. A canal is a trench filled with water deep
enough to carry well-laden boats. The boats are drawn by horses which
travel along a path called a “tow path.” In most cases the boats are
moved up and down inclines by means of what are called “locks” on the
canal. It is usually cheaper to haul goods by canals than by natural
streams as the locks make the water lift or lower loads on inclines.

The people of New York state became convinced that canals along and
connecting their water-ways would be a good and cheap way to carry
manufactured articles from New York city to the western settlements,
and to convey wheat, corn, and other produce to the eastern markets.
A canal was planned between Albany and Buffalo, to connect the Great
Lakes with the Atlantic. But the expense of this canal would be great
and many people did not believe that the traffic would repay it. The
matter was made a political issue and on it DeWitt Clinton was elected
governor.

It was largely through his zeal and energy that the project was
carried to a successful issue, and a canal forty feet wide and three
hundred and sixty-three miles long was dug. While the canal was being
constructed people called it “Clinton’s Folly,” and when it was
finished and successful they called it “Clinton’s Big Ditch.”

An effort was made to get the general government to help construct
this canal, but the bill was vetoed. Governor Clinton secured the
help of the business men of New York, and four months after the aid
bill was vetoed, the canal was begun, Clinton himself throwing the
first shovelful of dirt. In fact, there was dug not one canal, but two
canals,--one between Lake Erie and the Hudson, and the other between
the Hudson and Lake Champlain.

[Illustration: DE WITT CLINTON]

In the summer of 1825 the western part was opened and boats went from
Buffalo to New York City. As there was no telegraph to announce the
news of the starting of the first canal-boat, it was carried by cannon,
placed at intervals along the route. When the boat left Buffalo, the
first cannon was fired; the man at the second heard the report and
fired his piece; and so from one to another the news was borne to New
York in two hours. Governor Clinton was on the boat which made this
first trip; he carried a keg of water dipped from Lake Erie which he
poured into New York Bay, as a sign that the two were united. From the
first the canal was a paying investment as well as a great convenience
to the people. Freight rates decreased at once to much less than their
former rates. Instead of its costing the farmer of western New York
$1.10 to send a bushel of his wheat to the eastern market, it cost only
forty cents.

There was another important result. So much freight was carried down
the canal that vessels began to come to New York City in preference to
Philadelphia and other ports, as they were sure of cargoes of grain,
lumber, etc. This had much to do with the growth of New York City and
the prosperity of the state. This canal is still used. Every year there
travel down it great fleets of grain barges drawn by steam tugs. People
overlook other things in Clinton’s political record, and, on account of
this canal, remember him as the benefactor of his state.

About the time that the Erie Canal was completed, the first steam
railway was built in England. Its inventor was an Englishman who was
born while the American colonies were fighting for independence. George
Stephenson was the son of a poor workman, and as a boy he toiled in the
coal-mine where his father was employed. He made up his mind, however,
to get an education. When he was eighteen, he attended a night school
and learned to read and write. About this time his father’s health
failed and George had to support the family. Often he had to labor by
night as well as by day, but he managed to keep on with his studies.

Uncovered lights were then used by miners; carried into mines where
there was gas, these often occasioned explosions in which many
miners were wounded and killed. Stephenson set to work to invent a
safety-lamp. Meanwhile, Sir Humphrey Davy was working on a similar
invention. The two English scientists, independently of each other,
arrived at success about the same time.

Stephenson now turned his attention to the subject of steam locomotion.
He made a locomotive, a “traveling engine” as he called it, which in
1814 was successfully used in hauling coal-cars at a speed of four
miles an hour. Stephenson saw that this locomotive had many defects,
and he set to work to obtain better results. He succeeded the next year
in building an engine which had “few parts and simplicity of action.”

After many years of discussion, a plan for a railroad was approved by
parliament and a line was opened in 1825. People marveled at seeing
Stephenson’s engine travel at a speed of fifteen miles an hour; they
doubted whether the railway would ever become a practicable mode of
travel. Stephenson said, “I venture to tell you that I think you will
live to see the day when railways will supersede almost all other
methods of conveyance in this country--when mail coaches will go by
railway, and railroads will become the great highways for the king and
all his subjects. The time is coming when it will be cheaper for a
working man to travel on a railway than to walk on foot.”

After the success of the first railway, it was decided to build a line
to connect Liverpool and Manchester, as the canal between these two
cities was inadequate for the handling of their passengers and freight.
There was held a contest between different steam engines in which
Stephenson’s Rocket came out victor. A paper commenting on the success
of the Rocket, said: “The experiments at Liverpool have established
principles which will give a greater impulse to civilization than it
has ever received from any single cause since the press first opened
the gates of knowledge to the human species at large.” This proved
true. The problem of cheap and speedy land-travel was now solved.
During the years which followed England was covered with a network of
railroads.

America with its great distances to traverse, was not slow to adopt the
railroad. Only three years after Stephenson’s passenger railway was
opened, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad was begun. The first cars were
only stage-coaches made to run on rails and the locomotive was a crude
affair,--but it was a vast improvement on former methods of travel.
Hundreds and thousands of miles of railroads were built in different
parts of the country. Now, great lines connect the north and south, the
east and west. Huge engines, very unlike Stephenson’s little Rocket,
travel a mile a minute: instead of taking weeks to go from the Atlantic
to the Pacific coast, people can make the journey in five days.

Before the steam railway was invented by an Englishman, an American
inventor had applied the use of steam to water-travel and had invented
a steamboat. James Watt, a Scotch inventor, had prepared the way by
his invention of the steam engine. After this was devised, many people
thought that it would be possible and useful to make it furnish motive
power for water-travel. Several American inventors attempted to make
boats moved by steam power and had more or less success; but they
lacked either money to carry out their plans or perseverance to
bring them to public notice.

While Watts was working on the steam engine, there was born in America
a boy who was to apply it successfully to water-travel. This was Robert
Fulton, who was born in Pennsylvania, in 1765. He was only a schoolboy
during the stirring days of the American Revolution. He was a bright
boy and early showed inventive talent. One holiday he went fishing with
some schoolmates, in a boat propelled by means of poles. To avoid the
labor of using these poles, Robert made some paddle-wheels which he
attached to the boat; he also fixed on the stern a paddle by means of
which the boat could be guided.

[Illustration: ROBERT FULTON]

But this was mere schoolboy sport. It did not occur to Fulton till
many years later to make boat-building his profession. Even as a
boy he determined that he would be an artist. He spent four years
in Philadelphia working and studying; there he succeeded so well
that he went abroad. In England he was welcomed by Benjamin West, a
popular American painter. Through his courtesy and kindness, his young
countryman met many interesting English people, men of affairs and
scientists as well as artists. In England Fulton became interested in
canals, which he thought would be useful to convey merchandise along
the water-ways of New York, as you know was done later. In fact, he
became so much interested in this subject that he gave more time to it
than to painting and he invented several improvements in canals and
canal-boats.

In 1797 Fulton went to France where he continued his art studies and
his scientific experiments. He invented a torpedo and diving boat,
but he did not succeed in getting either the French or the English
government to take it up. In Paris he met a wealthy American, Mr.
Robert Livingston, who was interested in science and who had tried to
make a steamboat. Fulton said that he was sure he could do so if only
he had money to carry on the necessary experiments. Mr. Livingston at
once offered to advance the funds and to share the future profits.

Fulton gladly accepted and began his experiments. He made a little
model of a steamboat with side-wheels turned by machinery. Then he made
a trial boat which broke before it was used. Undiscouraged, he at once
set to work on a second one. This was tried on the river Seine and to
Fulton’s great satisfaction it worked well. Then he had an engine built
in England and sent to America. Mr. Livingston secured the passage of
an act by the New York legislature giving to him and Fulton for twenty
years the sole right to use on the waters in New York state boats
propelled by “fire or steam.” People laughed and said that they were
welcome to the right for a hundred years. They called the steamboat on
which Fulton was working “Fulton’s Folly.”

In the summer of 1807, there was completed the Clermont, a side-paddle
steamboat one hundred and thirty feet in length. It was an ugly object;
even Livingston confessed, “It looks like a backwoods sawmill mounted
on a scow and set on fire.”

Fulton made ready for a trial trip from New York to Albany. The boat
moved off from shore, and then stopped. Fulton hurried to the engine,
and discovered and corrected the cause of the trouble. The boat moved
off again, and this time it kept on amid the cheers of the people.
The steamboat was no longer a question, it was an accomplished fact.
On that trial trip the boat went a hundred and fifty miles in thirty
hours, which seemed wonderful speed in those days. How different the
Clermont was from the swift and powerful boats of to-day, the “ocean
greyhounds,” as they are called.

In 1812 during the war with Great Britain, Fulton made a plan for a
steam war-ship and he was authorized to build it, the first in the
world. While attending to its construction he contracted a severe cold
and died in February, 1814.

We have considered improved methods of travel,--canals, railways, and
steamboats. Let us look at what invention has done for agriculture in
America. We may almost say that Whitney created the cotton supremacy
of to-day. Until he invented the gin, the seeds and lint had to be
separated by hand. It was a tedious and costly process. The gin does
the work so rapidly and well that it is possible to raise and sell
cotton much cheaper than other clothing materials. Thus it has become
the great agricultural staple of the South.

Whitney, the inventor of the gin, was not, as you might suppose, a
southerner. He was born in 1765 on a farm in Massachusetts; he never
even saw a cotton plant until about the time that he invented the gin.

From boyhood Eli Whitney showed an intelligent curiosity about
machinery and a mechanical turn. One Sunday he was left at home while
the other members of the family went to church. He took advantage of
the opportunity to investigate his father’s big silver watch; he took
the works apart, but with such care and skill that he was able to put
them together properly and his father never suspected what had been
done until Eli told him years afterwards.

Eli was a faithful student at the village school near his home; he
longed for a better education than could be obtained there and he
resolved to go to college. His father thought it would be better for
the young man, now nineteen, to continue work at trade or business,
but Eli was determined to have an education. For four years he worked
by day on the farm and in the shop to earn money for his expenses, and
studied at night to prepare himself for college. Then he went to Yale,
where he spent four years, eking out his scanty funds by doing odd jobs
and working during vacation.

In 1792 he was graduated from Yale. He wished to study law but his
funds were now exhausted and it was necessary for him to set to work.
So he went to Georgia to teach school. There were then no railroads
across the country, and Whitney went by sea, which was the cheapest and
most convenient way of making the journey. From New York there traveled
on the same boat Mrs. Greene, the widow of the famous General Nathanael
Greene. She and her children, who were on their way to their home in
Georgia, soon made friends with their fellow-traveler, the bright young
New Englander. When Whitney reached Savannah he was disappointed about
the school which he had come to teach.

Mrs. Greene at once invited him to visit her home where he could study
law until he found such a position as he wished. He proved a pleasant
visitor and a helpful one, too. He was always ready to put in bolts
and screws where they were needed and made many labor-saving little
devices. One day Mrs. Greene complained that her embroidery frame tore
the cloth on which she was working. Mr. Whitney at once made a new
frame, far superior to the old one.

Not long after this, some of Mrs. Greene’s guests were talking about
the unprosperous condition of the South. It could be remedied, they
thought, if a way could be devised to separate the short staple cotton
from the seed, which would make cotton a profitable crop. The seed
and lint of the sea island cotton do not adhere so closely, and these
were separated by means of a roller-gin, acting on the principle of
the clothes-wringer. But the sea island cotton can be grown only in a
certain section near the coast. The seeds and lint of the short staple,
or upland, cotton adhere so closely that they had to be separated by
hand. Mrs. Greene suggested that Mr. Whitney, who was so clever with
tools, should invent a machine to do this work. Whitney was willing
to try. He had never even seen cotton in the seed; he got some and
examined it and tried to devise a machine to do the work of the human
fingers.

His first plan was to have a cylinder on which were fastened circular
saws; as the cylinder revolved the saw-teeth would catch the cotton
and drag it from the seeds. On the plantation he could not get tin or
metal plates to make these saws; finally he decided that teeth of wire
would do as well or better. He made a model of a gin which worked well,
except for the fact that the cotton lint stuck to the saw-teeth and
clogged them.

“I must devise some way to get the cotton off the teeth,” he said.

“Use a brush,” suggested Mrs. Greene, picking up a brush and with it
removing the cotton from the wires. Mr. Whitney accepted the suggestion
and put rows of small brushes on a second cylinder to meet the teeth
and take off the cotton.

In 1793 Whitney went north to secure a patent for his machine. The
Secretary of State then was Jefferson who was interested in all
inventions and especially in those useful in agriculture. He asked many
questions about the workings of the gin which he foresaw would prove a
vast benefit to the cotton-growing states.

Cotton was raised and sold now at a profit, for one man could gin a
thousand pounds in the time it had taken to seed one pound by hand.
Macaulay said, “What Peter the Great did to make Russia dominant, Eli
Whitney’s invention of the cotton gin has more than equaled in its
relation to the power and progress of the United States.”

I wish I could tell you that Whitney won fortune by his invention which
was such a great benefit to his countrymen, but this was not the case.
Men infringed his patent rights and there was for a long time a foolish
prejudice among buyers against ginned cotton. Whitney spent thirteen
years struggling for justice and recognition, and his patent had almost
expired before his legal rights were established. Friends made an
effort to get the patent, which ran only fourteen years, extended, but
in vain.

Whitney was destined to be more successful in another undertaking. He
thought that the United States ought to make its own firearms, and he
succeeded in getting money advanced by the government to aid him in
starting a factory near New Haven. He invented new methods which proved
successful and profitable. His factory brought him fortune and his
prosperous latter years were spent in his Connecticut home.

Another American benefactor of the farmer first and so of the whole
country was Cyrus McCormick, the inventor of the reaper. He was born in
Virginia in 1809. In his boyhood, grain was cut with the sickle. It was
gathered into bundles by hand, tied, and put up in stacks. The grain
was separated from the straw and chaff by beating it with flails. This
was slow and tiresome work.

Many men before McCormick tried to invent machines to reap grain. Some
of the English machines were fairly successful. You would think that
the English farmers would welcome the invention. Instead, they said
that it would deprive laborers of work, and they threatened to kill the
makers if they continued to manufacture these machines.

In sparsely-populated America people were on the lookout for
labor-saving inventions; they welcomed the reaping machine which was
invented by McCormick in 1831. This useful invention won both money and
fame for Mr. McCormick; a part of his well-gained wealth was devoted to
the endowment of schools.

In 1851 at the World’s Fair in London there was a trial of different
reapers. Under unfavorable conditions, the McCormick machine did
perfect work; at a timed trial it proved that it could cut twenty acres
in a day. A farmer who was present broke his sickle across his knee,
saying that it would no longer be needed. Wonderful improvements have
been made in the reaper. There are great machines now on the prairie
lands of the west which cut the grain, thresh it, and carry it from the
fields in sacks ready for the mill.

Mowing-machines constructed on a plan similar to the reapers, cut
grass, and horse-rakes and hay-forks handle the hay so cheaply that
the production of hay now costs less than a fifth of what it did under
the old methods. Flails, too, have been replaced by modern threshing
machines.

The labor-saving machines used on a farm enable a few people to do
with ease the work which formerly required the labor of many. As
fewer men are required in the country, more are set free to engage in
business and trade. For these purposes, they gather in cities, which
have gained size and wealth that would have been impossible under old
agricultural conditions.

Let us now consider the improvements in methods of communication.
The carrying of letters and papers by the great postal system of our
government, is done chiefly on the steam cars and steamboats, which
have already been described. You know, however, that by means of the
telegraph and the telephone messages can be transmitted much more
promptly than by mail. Both these modes of communication are recent.
Before they were invented, various methods were used to transmit
intelligence quickly. You learned how, by the firing of cannon along
the canal, in two hours it was announced in New York that the first
boat was starting down the Erie Canal.

A thousand years ago, beacon-fires were lighted along the coasts of
England to warn people of the approach of an enemy; a hundred years
ago, similar signals were used in our own country. Sometimes a wood
fire was kindled, sometimes a pot of tar was set on fire. At the
beginning of the nineteenth century, the semaphore was used to some
extent. This consists of a horizontal bar, set on a high post. By
changes in its position, according to a method of signals agreed upon,
messages are sent. Flags are used for signals and messages are sent by
placing flags of different colors and shapes in different positions;
this is less practicable on land than at sea where the range of vision
is uninterrupted. Another method of signaling is by mirrors to reflect
the sunlight. But all these methods have inconveniences and are limited
to comparatively short distances.

Early in the nineteenth century, scientists thought that electricity
which can be conducted by wires from place to place might be utilized
to carry messages. This was at last successfully accomplished by an
American, Samuel Finley Breese Morse.

Morse was born in Massachusetts in 1791 and was given the names of his
father, his grandfather, and his great-grandfather. As befitting a
child with the reputation of so many to sustain, his education began
early. At four he was sent to what was called a “dame school” conducted
by an old lady in the neighborhood. At seven he was sent away from home
to attend a preparatory school; later he went to an academy; and thence
at fifteen to Yale College.

At Yale he was much interested in some experiments with which a
professor illustrated a lecture on electricity. It seemed to young
Morse that this great force which travels with such wonderful speed
ought to be put to some use. During vacation he made many experiments
in the college laboratory.

But art, not science, was the subject which interested him most. From
his childhood, he had been fond of drawing; he developed such skill and
interest in the pictorial art that when he left college he told his
father he wished to become an artist. Dr. Morse had hoped that his son
would choose a profession but he resolved to let the youth follow his
own inclinations and talents. Young Morse studied art several years,
first in America and afterwards in England. His pictures brought him
praise and medals abroad, and at home he became a successful portrait
painter. He organized the National Academy of the Arts of Design and
was made its president. Then he went abroad again and spent three years
studying his chosen art.

In 1832 he started home; he was now forty-one years old and his
life-work up to this time had been art. At this time an incident turned
his attention to science, to the mysterious force which had interested
him in his college days. On shipboard coming home, there arose a
discussion about electricity and the almost instantaneous passage of a
current along a copper wire.

Morse said: “If the presence of electricity can be made visible in
any part of the circuit, I see no reason why intelligence may not be
transmitted by it.”

The more he thought about it, the more convinced he became that
messages could be sent as he had suggested. When he got home, instead
of painting portraits he spent his time trying to make an electric
current carry a message along a wire and to invent an instrument to
receive the message. He became very poor, and moved to an attic where
he devoted himself to study and experiments. In 1835 he had devised
an alphabet consisting of dots and dashes and had invented a machine,
rough and crude but which would carry messages.

He did not have money to push his invention, but in 1837 Mr. Alfred
Vail became interested in the machine and offered to furnish money
and enter into partnership with the inventor. In 1840 a patent was
secured. Morse tried to get an appropriation from Congress for testing
his machine, but it was delayed so long that he despaired of success.
One morning in March, 1843, a young friend, Miss Ellsworth, brought him
news that an appropriation of thirty thousand dollars had been made
by Congress for “constructing a line of electric-magnetic telegraph.”
Morse promised that she might send the first message by telegraph
between Baltimore and Washington. The line of wires put up on poles,
was finished May 24, 1844. The first message sent was the text selected
by Miss Ellsworth, “What hath God wrought.”

The Democratic National Convention was held in Baltimore about the
time that the line was completed and the names of the nominees were
telegraphed to Washington. People refused to believe the message was
really sent till the news was confirmed by later tidings.

In 1842 Morse made experiments to prove that messages could be carried
under water. As water is a good conductor of electricity, it was
necessary to insulate the wire, which Morse did by wrapping it with
hemp covered with pitch, tar, and rubber. This under-water wire worked
well, and a plan was formed to put across the Atlantic a cable resting
on the plateau between Newfoundland and Ireland.

This scheme was undertaken by Mr. Cyrus W. Field. The first cable made
of insulated wire protected by twisted wire rope was broken in the
attempt to lay it in 1857. The second cable was laid and it worked a
few days. The first message sent by the cable which united Europe and
America was “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
towards men.” The third cable failed also, but the fourth, laid in
1866, gave good service. For thirteen years Cyrus Field had worked for
the cable and at last out of failure had come success. Since the fourth
cable was laid, there has been constant communication between Europe
and America.

The latest great step forward in telegraphy was made by Marconi, an
Italian scientist, who invented a system of telegraphing without the
use of wires.

The telephone has one advantage over the telegraph; it enables a person
not only to send messages but to carry on a conversation with persons
at a distance. The electric telephone was invented in 1875 by Alexander
Graham Bell. His father was a Scotch educator and scientist who
invented a method called “Bell’s visible speech” to teach deaf-mutes to
speak. Telephones now connect places hundreds of miles apart.

As great advances have been made within the last century in methods
of lighting houses as in modes of travel and of communication. At
the beginning of the nineteenth century, people still used candles
and crude lamps, similar to those which had been in use for hundreds
of years. The principle of the candle and the lamp is the same; oil
or grease, liquid or solid, is burned by means of a wick. During our
great-grandfather’s days, well-to-do people used chiefly wax candles
and poor people used candles made of tallow. In many families the only
light was furnished by pine knots, called lightwood because the pitch
burned making a bright light. It was by such a light that Abraham
Lincoln studied.

About the beginning of the nineteenth century an Englishman invented
practical gas-light and carried gas made from coal through his house
in pipes. In 1821 illuminating gas was made and used in Baltimore for
the first time in this country. About a half-century later, another
stride forward was made in the lighting of houses. Edison invented the
electric light, the brightest, cleanest, and safest light, and the one
requiring least care of any yet devised. There are two kinds of the
electric light, both widely used. The incandescent, or “glow lamp”
as it is called in England, is most common. The arc light is used for
lighting large buildings and city streets.

Thomas Edison is an American scientist who has made it his life-work
to make practical use of the great force of electricity. He was born
in 1847 and is still living and still working. He was the son of a
hard-working laborer. His mother had been a school teacher and she gave
her son as good an education as she could. When only twelve years old,
he started out to earn his own living as a news-boy on the Grand Trunk
Railroad.

He was a business-like, enterprising youngster. When there was exciting
news in his papers, he telegraphed the fact to stations in advance and
bought extra supplies of papers which he disposed of at a good price.
He decided that he would like to print a paper of his own, so he got
some old type and fitted up part of a freight-car as an office. Here
he published a weekly paper, “The Grand Trunk Herald,” which became
popular with railroad people. He undertook a second paper called the
“Paul Pry” but for some personal remarks in it he was severely punished
and he soon after gave up journalism.

He now became interested in chemistry. He bought cheap apparatus
and some chemicals and in his freight-car office devoted himself to
experiments. Unfortunately, an over-turned bottle of phosphorus set the
floor on fire; the conductor put the young editor and scientist, with
his printing press and chemical outfit, off the car.

When Edison was about fifteen, he saved the life of a two-year-old
child, dragging it from in front of the engine at risk of his own
life. The grateful father was a station agent and he offered to teach
Edison telegraphy. The boy became a rapid operator, but was too fond
of experimenting to devote himself to work and he drifted from one
place to another. Finally he went to New York City. For his inventions
of stock-printing and other telegraph appliances, he received forty
thousand dollars and this enabled him to establish a laboratory to work
out his ideas.

For many years Edison was laughed at because he believed that a
telegraph wire can be made to carry two messages at once; by his duplex
system he made it do so, and later by his quadruplex system he made it
carry four messages.

He added some improvements to the telephone invented by Bell, invented
a phonograph to record and repeat the sound of the human voice, and a
megaphone to carry the sound to a distance, and the kinetoscope.

His greatest work, however, was in connection with the electric light.
He worked on it a long time before he succeeded. The chief trouble was
in securing a good non-conducting filament. He sent men to search in
China, Japan, South America, and Ceylon for bamboo and other plants
which would answer his purpose. Out of three thousand specimens of
vegetable fiber, he found three or four which would do. In 1880 the
light which is now used all over the world was perfected and exhibited.

Edison has made few, if any real scientific discoveries, but he has
made many ingenious inventions, and has applied scientific principles
to practical purposes so as to increase the comfort and economy of
living.




Andrew Jackson

The Man of the People


While Washington, the aristocrat, was using his sword and Jefferson,
the scholarly gentleman, was using his pen, to form in America a
government of the people, there was growing up in a border settlement a
youth who was to be a “man of the people” and bear rule over it.

Andrew Jackson was the son of a poor Irish emigrant, who spent the
years after his coming to America in a brave fight for bread for
his wife and children. Worn out by the struggle, he died, and the
children were left to their mother’s care. Andrew was born at the
Waxhaw settlement which is partly in North Carolina and partly in South
Carolina, both of which states have been claimed as Jackson’s native
place. In childhood he attended an “old field school” where he gained
the rudiments of an education and at work and play held his own among
his comrades.

“I could throw him three times out of four,” said an old schoolmate,
in later days “but he never would _stay throwed_. He was dead game and
never would give up.”

Neither then nor in later life was he handsome, with his pale,
sharp-featured face, his sandy red hair, and his keen steel blue eyes.

Andrew’s elder brothers, mere lads at the time of the Revolution,
served in the patriot forces and Andrew joined them when he was only
thirteen. He was taken prisoner by the British and it was then that a
well-known incident occurred.

A British officer ordered Andrew to black his boots and the lad refused.

“I am a prisoner of war,” he said, “and demand to be treated as such.”

The angry officer drew his sword to chastise the young rebel; Andrew,
raising his arm to parry the blow, received a wound, the scar from
which he carried to his grave. One of his brothers died from neglected
wounds. Andrew and Robert were confined with about three hundred other
American prisoners in a stockade at Camden. Andrew, through a hole in
the fence, watched the battle of Hobkirk’s Hill and the last hope of
release departed when brave General Greene was forced to retreat. Not
long after, however, the two brothers were released, probably in an
exchange of prisoners. With their mother they made their way home.
Robert died of smallpox caught while in prison and Mrs. Jackson died
soon after of fever contracted while nursing American prisoners. Thus
Andrew was left alone in the world,--with a bitter feeling that his
mother and brothers had been sacrificed to British injustice.

The orphaned and penniless lad set to work, first at a trade, then as
a school teacher; finally he studied law. When he began to practice
his profession, he crossed the mountains and went west to the region
now forming the state of Tennessee. In that rough border country, as
it then was, his strong will, courage, and common sense were even more
valuable than his small store of legal knowledge. People soon came to
respect and depend on him. When offenses against the law were reported
to the governor, he said, “Just inform Mr. Jackson; he will be sure to
do his duty and the offenders will be punished.”

Mr. Jackson soon became Judge Jackson. We are told that on one occasion
he ordered the sheriff to arrest a desperate criminal; the officer
returned and reported that he was unable to do so, the man resisted
his authority. Judge Jackson descended from the bench, went out and
arrested the man, marched him into court, resumed his seat, tried the
case, and sentenced the offender. It was a characteristic incident.

In 1791 Jackson married and between him and his wife there existed
a simple-hearted devotion which was never broken. Some one who saw
her years later when the beauty of youth was gone, described her as a
“coarse-looking, stout little old woman,” but she remained beautiful to
his eyes.

After Tennessee was admitted to statehood, Jackson was sent to
Congress, first as representative, then as senator. From Washington he
returned to the mountains which he loved, and busied himself as store
keeper, cotton-planter, and stock-raiser,--recognized in his community
as a man of undoubted integrity, a staunch friend, and a relentless
foe. He took part in two duels, in one of which he was severely wounded
and killed his opponent.

Jackson offered his services as soon as the war of 1812 broke out. He
was ordered to lead the militia to New Orleans, which it was thought
would be attacked. When he had gone about five hundred miles he was
ordered to disband his troops.

Soon after, he led a force against the Creek Indians who took advantage
of the war in progress to attack outlying settlements and kill white
settlers. The troops failed to receive needed supplies and Jackson gave
up his private stores to the sick and wounded and set his soldiers an
example of cheerful endurance of hardship. At one time, it is said, he
invited some officers to share his breakfast and they found--a bowl of
acorns and a pitcher of water.

At last Jackson agreed that if provisions did not come in two days
the troops might return home. Soon after they turned back, they met
supplies; they refreshed themselves and then started to continue the
homeward march. Jackson galloped to the front, raised his rifle and
furiously swore that he would kill the first man who made a step
homeward. The troops, driven back to the path of duty, defeated the
Indians in several battles. After one battle Jackson found an Indian
baby in the arms of its dead mother. The Indian women refused to care
for it and Jackson took it to his own tent, fed it with brown sugar and
water and finally sent it to his home, the Hermitage, where the young
Indian was cared for and reared.

Jackson’s military merit was now recognized and he was made
major-general.

At New Orleans which was attacked by British forces about the close of
the war, he won the one important land victory of the war. The British,
secure in their superior numbers and discipline, were confident of
success.

“I shall eat my Christmas dinner in New Orleans,” said one of the
British officers.

“Perhaps so,” said General Jackson to whom this remark was repeated,
“but I shall have the honor of presiding at that dinner.”

With wonderful skill and energy, he put the place in condition for
defence and made ready for the British attack which took place January
8, 1815. Fortune as well as good generalship favored the Americans.
The British were defeated with a loss of about three thousand men,
including their commander. The Americans lost only eight men killed and
thirteen wounded. A treaty of peace had been signed two weeks before,
but there was then no ocean-cable to convey the tidings, and the news
did not reach America until after the battle had been fought and the
repulsed British had sailed away.

In 1818 Jackson led troops to put down the Seminoles in Florida who
were making war on the border settlements and had massacred the people
at Fort Mimms.

In 1824 Jackson was one of four candidates for the presidency. The
People’s Party founded by Jefferson was divided and put forward two
candidates both from the west,--Jackson and Clay, who were bitter
enemies. Adams was elected, but four years later Jackson was the
successful candidate. The poor son of the Irish emigrant had fought his
way upward,--saddler, lawyer, judge, general, he now held the highest
office of the country. He thought and said that his will was the will
of the people and he ruled with autocratic power, never hesitating
to oppose Congress. If he thought that a bill was not for the best
interests of the country, he vetoed it. He never forgot a friend and
seldom forgave a foe. He accepted the view of one of his followers who
said “to the victors belong the spoils of the vanquished.” He removed
office-holders to bestow offices on his friends--a bad example followed
and carried to great excesses by all parties from that day to this. In
1832 he was re-elected; the people recognized that with all his faults
he was honest and loyal to their interests.

The most important acts of his administration were his attitude towards
the Nullification Act of South Carolina and his leadership in the “bank
war.” A dramatic incident, at a dinner in honor of Jefferson’s birthday
in April, 1830, showed clearly the president’s attitude towards those
who were beginning to be dissatisfied with the general government.
Jackson was called on for the first toast. He raised his glass, saying,
“Our federal union! it must and shall be preserved.” Calhoun, the great
South Carolina leader rose and offered the next toast, “The union,
next to our liberty the most dear.” After a pause, he added, “May we
all remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of
the states and by distributing equally the benefits and burdens of the
union.”

South Carolina considered herself aggrieved by certain tariff
regulations, and proclaimed that these duties should not be paid after
a certain day and that if the United States attempted to enforce
payment the state would secede. Jackson issued a proclamation stating
ably his views as to the binding force of the union. He sent to
Charleston a naval force, one of the officers of which was Farragut,
and he ordered General Scott to have troops ready to march at once to
South Carolina. Through the influence of Clay, a compromise tariff bill
was passed and the conflict was postponed thirty years.

Jackson acted with equal energy in the bank matter; thinking national
banks are unconstitutional, he vetoed a bill in their favor, even
though his friends believed it would cost him re-election. Feeling ran
so high on this subject that the Senate passed a resolution of censure
on the president; this resolution was afterwards removed from the
record. During Jackson’s administration the national debt was entirely
paid. He was probably the only president who went out of office more
popular than he went in.

He retired to his beloved home, the Hermitage, and there he died in
1845. His tomb bears this inscription:

              “General
            Andrew Jackson
  Born on the fifteenth of March, 1767
  Died on the eighth of June, 1845.”




Henry Clay

The Great Peacemaker


On April 12, 1777, Henry Clay, the son of a poor Baptist clergyman, was
born in Virginia in the country known as the “Slashes of Hanover.” His
earliest recollections were of the death of his father when he was
four years old and of Tarleton’s troops passing his home and carrying
off slaves, provisions, and even his mother’s clothing.

In boyhood Henry Clay worked hard to aid his widowed mother. He turned
his hand to such work as came up--plowing the fields around his home,
and, like many another country boy, going to the grist mill with his
bag of corn to be ground into meal. In later years he received, in
memory of his boyhood struggles, the nickname of “the Millboy of the
Slashes.”

He studied reading, writing, and arithmetic in an “old field school,”
worked a while as clerk in a store, and then studied law. In those days
there were no law schools in the country, and Clay, like other aspiring
young men, gained the necessary training from a few books, a little
instruction in a law office, and practice in the courts.

At twenty the new-fledged lawyer, went west to make his home in the
Blue Grass region of Kentucky which had been but a few years a state.
This adopted state was his home thenceforth and all his interests
were identified with it. He worked with indomitable energy. In order
to train and modulate his defective voice he went out in the barnyard
and argued his cases before the pigs and cows. He used to say that the
brutes of the farm were the best audiences he ever had.

Clay secured a good practice, married well and lived happily at
Ashland, a farm just outside Lexington, which he bought about the
time of his marriage. Remembering his own struggles and the kindness
extended him during those years, he was always interested in ambitious
young men and ready to help them with money, advice, and influence.

At the age of twenty-nine, Clay was appointed to represent Kentucky in
the United States Senate for an unexpired term. He early formulated his
“American system” declaring himself in favor of internal improvements,
building up home industries, and distributing surplus money from the
sale of public lands among the states, according to population. In 1811
he was in favor of war with Great Britain; as Speaker of the House,
“The War Hawk,” as he was called, did much to bring it about. He was
one of the men sent in 1814 to make terms of peace with England, and it
was largely through his labors that favorable terms were secured.

Clay admired General Jackson’s military ability but he censured the
invasion of Spanish territory in Florida and the two men became bitter
and relentless enemies.

In 1820 began the career for which he is famous--that of the “Great
Pacificator,” trying to avert conflict between the north and the south,
the free and the slave states. It was largely through his influence
that the contest was so long postponed. Clay was not the author of
the Missouri Compromise--as the bill was called which provided that
Missouri should be admitted to statehood without restriction as to
slavery--but it was through his influence that it was passed. Although
he struggled to adjust differences and keep the peace, he stood
fearlessly by what he thought was right.

On one occasion Clay consulted a friend about the stand he was
preparing to take on a public question. The friend suggested that the
course he planned might injure his political prospects. His reply
was, “I did not send for you to ask what might be the effects of the
proposed movement on my prospects, but whether it is right. I would
rather be right than be president.”

His life-long ambition was to become president, and he was several
times a candidate and once seemed on the eve of victory only to be
defeated. The Great Peacemaker was too moderate for either side. The
north accused him of favoring slavery, the south of making war against
established institutions. He was not, however, in favor of freeing
slaves, except gradually, and then of colonizing them. His own slaves
were well-treated and loved him dearly.

Clay was one of what is called the Great Triumvirate, composed of the
three foremost leaders in Congress; Webster and Calhoun were the other
two. The three were in many ways rivals for power and popularity, but
they united in opposing Jackson--who, secure in the favor of the
people, held his own against all three.

In 1833 Clay, the “Great Compromiser,” carried his second great
compromise act, securing the passage of a tariff bill which caused
South Carolina to withdraw her Nullification Act.

“There is one man and only one man who can save the Union,” said
John Randolph of Roanoke just before his death. “That man is Henry
Clay. I know he has the power--I believe he will be found to have the
patriotism and firmness equal to the occasion.” His patriotism and
firmness were indeed equal to his power.

In 1850 the friction between the slave and free states became so great
that war seemed inevitable. In order to maintain peace, Clay, then an
old and feeble man of seventy-three, gave up private for public life
and returned to the senate. For the last time the Great Triumvirate
met in Congress. Clay was so feeble that he had to be helped up and
down the steps of the Capitol, but with unquenched energy and fire, he
appealed to the people’s patriotism and urged them to uphold the Union.
Through his influence, the compromise measures of 1850 were adopted and
peace was again restored for a time.

He could well say near the close of his life, “If any one desires
to know the leading and paramount object of my public life, the
preservation of the Union will furnish him the key.”

The great leader grew gradually weaker and passed away, June 29, 1852.
His body was carried back to Kentucky and laid to rest in the state he
so loved.

“I am a Whig,” he said once: “I am so because I believe the principles
of the Whig party are best adapted to promote the prosperity of the
country. I seek to change no man’s allegiance to his party, be it what
it may. A life of great length and experience has satisfied me that
all parties aim at the common good of the country. The great body of
the Democrats, as well as the Whigs, are so from a conviction that
their policy is patriotic. I take the hand of one as cordially as
that of another, for all are Americans. I place country far above all
parties. Look aside from that and parties are no longer worthy of being
cherished.”

“I know no south, no north, no east, no west,” he said, at another
time. It was such sentiments as these that made him Lincoln’s ideal of
a statesman. The conflict he had striven to avert was postponed--but
it came. His children and grandchildren fought, some on one side some
on the other. Two of his grandchildren who were brothers fought on
opposite sides and both fell in battle. Such was the War between the
States.




Daniel Webster

A Famous Orator


Daniel Webster was descended from one of the Puritans who came from Old
England to New England in the “great emigration.” His father, Ebenezer
Webster, was a sturdy pioneer who fought in the French and Indian War
and in the Revolution. “Captain Webster, I believe I can trust you,”
said General Washington, and this was the opinion of all who knew him.

Daniel, one of his ten children, was born in 1782 in Salisbury, New
Hampshire. He was a delicate child and from babyhood was indulged and
petted by his parents and brothers and sisters. He was fond of outdoor
sports, but he was fond of study too and easily led his classes. Many
characteristic stories are told of his boyhood. It is said that one
of his first purchases was a handkerchief on which was printed the
recently-adopted Constitution of the United States. Thus as a child he
read and studied the great instrument which he was so eloquently to
uphold. Looking back to his childhood in later years, Webster said: “I
read what I could get to read, went to school when I could, and when
not at school was a farmer’s youngest boy, not good for much for want
of health and strength, but expected to do something.”

By means of many sacrifices on the part of his family, Daniel was kept
at school and finally sent to college. The attitude of the family
toward him is illustrated by an incident of his boyhood. He and his
brother Ezekiel were one day allowed to go to town, each being provided
with a small sum of spending-money. When they returned home Mrs.
Webster asked Daniel, “What did you do with your money?”

“Spent it,” was the reply, and there followed an enthusiastic
description of the day’s pleasures. Then the mother turned to the
silent elder brother.

“And what did you do with yours, ’Zekiel?”

“Lent it to Dan’el,” was the quiet answer.

The family was always “lending to Daniel”--making sacrifices for him
and feeling amply repaid by his affection and success.

Young Webster’s talents were early recognized; even in his college days
his eloquence and commanding presence and deep sonorous voice attracted
attention. When he was eighteen he delivered at Hanover a Fourth of
July oration; in crude form it uttered the message--love of country
and loyalty to the Constitution--which was the burden of his later
speeches. After leaving college he began the study of law. He taught
for awhile in order to aid his brother Ezekiel to obtain a collegiate
education, but kept steadily on with his studies.

In 1805 he was admitted to the bar, and established himself in a New
Hampshire village. He was an eloquent and able speaker, and gradually
became prominent in politics, making addresses at Federalist meetings
and on public occasions. In 1813, he was sent to Congress as a member
of the House. There he met Clay and Calhoun, the other members of
the “Great Triumvirate” of which you have heard. Webster spoke ably
in behalf of a national bank, of the tariff, and of other measures
advocated by the Federalists; he soon came to be recognized as one of
the foremost men of his party.

After serving a term in Congress, however, he returned to private
life for a few years. He removed to Boston where he continued the
practice of his profession, earning money easily and spending it with
equal facility, often before it was earned. He was known as one of the
ablest lawyers and greatest orators in the country. The effect of his
eloquence was aided by his commanding presence. “Good heavens, he is a
small cathedral by himself,” said a witty Englishman.

Among Webster’s famous addresses on public occasions were the
oration at Plymouth on the two hundredth anniversary of the landing
of the Pilgrims, the address five years later at the laying of the
corner-stone of the Bunker Hill monument, and the eulogy on Adams and
Jefferson. The best-known passage in the eulogy is the imaginary speech
of John Adams, which many people have supposed to be an extract from a
real speech. This begins with the famous words, “Sink or swim, live or
die, survive or perish, I give my hand and my heart to this vote.”

After serving again in the House, Webster was sent in 1827 to the
Senate; there he supported Henry Clay’s “American system.” About this
time the question of the tariff was causing much friction between the
North and the South, and the people of South Carolina were discussing
nullification. This discussion led to one of Webster’s ablest speeches.
In 1830 General Hayne of South Carolina made a speech expressing the
view that the Constitution was “a compact between sovereign states”
and asserting the right of secession which Kentucky and Virginia in
1799 and New England in 1814 had threatened to exercise. In his reply
to Hayne, Webster insisted that the Constitution was not a “compact”
but a “national instrument,” and he made an eloquent argument for the
Union and the Constitution. This speech was published and scattered far
and wide; it was inserted in school-books and declaimed in debating
societies; its author was regarded as the “great expounder and defender
of the Constitution.”

The life-long ambition of Webster, as of Clay, was to become president,
but like his rival he was doomed to disappointment. Many people thought
that Webster might have attained the honor in 1852 had it not been
for his speech in 1850 on the Fugitive Slave Law. Webster was not an
extremist. He considered slavery “one of the greatest evils, both moral
and political,” and he was opposed to its being admitted into the
western territories. He said, however, that the Constitution “found
slavery in the Union, it recognized it, and gave it solemn guaranties”
which could not honestly and honorably be broken. He asserted that
a state had no right to refuse to give up runaway slaves to their
masters, as was provided by the Fugitive Slave Law. He concluded his
speech with an eloquent appeal for national harmony and the Union. His
position was legally unassailable and he was animated by a desire to
conciliate and unite the jarring sections, but the speech called forth
a storm of indignation from the abolitionists. There was no longer any
hope that he would receive the presidential nomination.

But the time was at hand when earthly honors were a matter of no moment
to the great orator. His health was giving way, and he died September
8, 1852, at Marshfield, his beloved home beside the sea. His dying eyes
were gladdened by the sight of the flag he loved, the symbol of the
“Union and liberty” for which he had striven.




Abraham Lincoln

The War President


When asked about his early life Abraham Lincoln once said, “It can all
be condensed into a single sentence and that sentence you will find in
Gray’s ‘Elegy,’

  ‘The short and simple annals of the poor.’”

His father, Thomas Lincoln, was a roving, shiftless, man, a carpenter
by trade; after his marriage his wife taught him to read and to write
his name, but here his education began and ended. Abraham Lincoln’s
mother came, he said, “of a family of the name of Hanks,” about whom
nothing good is recorded. Of his mother personally, almost nothing is
known.

[Illustration: ABRAHAM LINCOLN]

Abraham Lincoln was born February 12, 1809, in a log cabin in Kentucky.
When he was seven years old, his father made one of his numerous moves,
going to Indiana and taking up a claim of land. There he built what was
called “a half-faced camp”--a log-shed open on one side; in this his
family passed the winter. The next year Thomas Lincoln built a cabin;
it had four walls, but for years it was left without floor, door, or
window. Instead of steps there were pegs in the wall by means of which
Abraham ascended to the loft where he slept. The furniture was rude
and scanty. It consisted of a few stools, a rough table and bed, some
pewter dishes, a skillet and a pot.

Abraham was only nine years old when his mother succumbed to a fatal
disease. As she lay on her death-bed she called her son and daughter to
her and gave them her last charge. “Be good to one another,” she said,
“love God and your kin.”

The winter which followed was dreary and desolate for the motherless
children. A few months later Thomas Lincoln brought to the cabin a
second wife who was a mother indeed to the two little ones. She was
thrifty and industrious, as well as kind and affectionate, and under
her rule the family had more of the comforts of life than it had ever
known before. Mrs. Lincoln insisted that ten-year-old Abe must be sent
to school and so he trudged every day to the log schoolhouse a mile and
a half from home.

He was a diligent student, and he read every book on which he could lay
his hands. These books were few in number; the Bible, “Æsop’s Fables,”
“Robinson Crusoe,” “Pilgrim’s Progress,” a history of the United
States, and Weems’ “Life of Washington,” were read and re-read. His
bookcase was a crack between the logs of the cabin wall. One night the
binding of the “Life of Washington,” was injured by a driving storm; to
pay the man from whom it was borrowed for the damage, Abe worked three
days in his corn field. At night the boy would lie flat on the floor
before the fire and cipher on a plank or a wooden shovel with a piece
of charcoal; when the surface was covered with figures, he would erase
them and begin anew.

His father considered the hours spent in study as wasted time, and
Abe was often called to put his books aside to grub and plow and mow.
Such work was little to his taste; he said in later years, “his father
taught him to work but never taught him to love work.”

Abe grew fast and at seventeen he was over six feet tall. He was
strong and active, but an awkward figure, in his homespun shirt,
buckskin trousers, and cap of squirrel or coon skin.

In the spring of 1830 when Abe was twenty-one his father moved to
Illinois where fertile land was to be had on easy terms. The household
goods were carried on an ox-wagon and it took two weeks to make the
long and tedious journey. In the new settlement the men set to work to
clear away the forest and build cabins. Abe helped to split rails to
fence in the little farm. He not only helped at home, but worked for
others as occasion demanded. We are informed that he bargained with a
Mrs. Miller “to split four hundred rails for every yard of brown jeans
dyed with white walnut bark that would be necessary to make him a pair
of trousers.”

A little later he made a trip to New Orleans with a boat-load of meat,
hogs, and corn. In that city for the first time he saw slaves bought
and sold. You remember that slavery had been introduced into America
early in the seventeenth century. For a long time slavery existed in
both the northern and the southern colonies, but in the course of time
it was limited to the south where alone slave labor was profitable.
Lincoln did not think that it was right that negroes should be sold
like cattle, and he said, “If ever I get a chance to hit that thing
[slavery] I’ll hit it hard.”

After his return home, he became clerk in a country store. Here by
his scrupulous honesty he earned the nickname “Honest Abe.” One day
he made an overcharge of fourpence and that night he walked several
miles to return the money. During his leisure he continued his studies.
Books were scarce, and on one occasion he walked six miles to borrow a
grammar.

In 1832 Abe Lincoln was elected captain of a company of volunteers
who marched with the regular troops against the Indian chief, Black
Hawk. Most of the men went home when their term of enlistment expired
but Abe Lincoln re-enlisted and served as a private. This was his
only experience in actual warfare. When he returned home he presented
himself as a candidate for the legislature. His neighbors heartily
supported “humble Abraham Lincoln” who was one of them, but he was
defeated. He was a clear, straightforward speaker with a pointed,
well-told joke for every occasion.

After his political defeat he opened a store in partnership with a
friend. As Lincoln spent his time in studying and telling jokes and
Berry spent his in drinking, it is no wonder that the business proved
a failure. Berry died soon after this; Lincoln assumed all the debts
of the firm and paid them to the last penny, although it required his
savings for over fifteen years.

Lincoln now began to study law, supporting himself, meanwhile, by doing
such work as came to hand. People took it as a joke that this rough,
awkward fellow was preparing himself for a profession. One day a man
who saw him sitting on a woodpile poring over a book asked, “What are
you reading, Abe?” “I am not reading; I am studying,” was the answer.
“Studying what?” “Law, sir,” said Abe. The man laughed uproariously,
but Lincoln kept on with his studies; neither in youth nor in manhood
was he to be turned from a purpose by ridicule. He worked as a
farmhand, he learned to survey lands, he served as postmaster of the
country office. We are told that “he carried the office around in his
hat,”--putting in his hat the handful of letters which came to New
Salem and distributing them as he went to survey land.

In 1837 Lincoln was licensed to practice law. He resolved to make his
home in Springfield, lately made the capital of the state. He rode
thither on a borrowed horse, carrying in a pair of saddle-bags all
his personal effects,--“two or three law books and a few pieces of
clothing.” One who knew him in those days describes him as a tall,
gaunt, awkward figure; he wore a faded brown hat, a loose, ill-fitting
coat, and trousers which were too short; in winter he added to this
costume a short cloak or a shawl. In one hand he carried a carpet-bag
containing his papers, and in the other a faded green cotton umbrella,
tied with a string. Like the other lawyers of the place, he “traveled
on the circuit,” going from one place to another to attend courts.
He usually carried with him a book or two; rising earlier than his
companions, he would sit by the fire to read and think. In later days
when a young lawyer asked Lincoln’s advice as to the best method of
obtaining a knowledge of law, he answered that it was “simple though
laborious,” such knowledge must be gained by careful reading and study.
“Work, work, work, is the main thing.”

Lincoln was popular with men and was known as an honest, kind-hearted
fellow. He himself told the following anecdote: one day as he was
riding along dressed in his best he saw a hog “mired up” beside the
road. Unwilling to soil his clothes, he passed on. The poor animal
gave a grunt which seemed to say, “There now, my last chance is gone.”
Unable to resist the brute’s appeal, Lincoln went back and helped it
out.

In 1842 Lincoln married Miss Mary Todd, a clever, well-bred woman, who
forwarded his professional and political success. She lacked, however,
the amiable temper which would have made a happy home; more and more
her husband’s interest centered in public matters and in politics. In
1844 he gave his enthusiastic support to Henry Clay, the presidential
candidate, who was “his ideal of a statesman.” Two years later Lincoln
was elected to Congress; after serving a term, he retired from public
life for awhile, devoting himself to his profession and to his studies.

In 1854 the repeal of the Missouri Compromise led him again to take an
interest in politics. Lincoln was opposed to the extension of slavery,
but he did not agree with the extreme abolitionists; he said that
“loyalty to the Constitution and the Union” forbade interference with
slavery where it was already established. In 1856 he was a member of
the Convention at Bloomington, Illinois, which formed the Republican
party, the object of which Lincoln said was “the preventing of the
spread and nationization of slavery.”

He became the Republican candidate for senator in 1858 and made a
famous speech in which he asserted that the Union could not endure,
part free and part slave. “‘A house divided against itself cannot
stand,’” he said. “I believe this government cannot endure permanently
half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved, I
do not expect the house to fall,--but I do expect it will cease to be
divided. It will become all the one thing or the other.” To a friend
who objected to this utterance he said, “If I had to draw a pen across
my record and erase my whole life from sight and I had one poor gift or
choice left as to what I should save from the wreck, I should choose
that speech and leave it to the world unerased.”

Lincoln was defeated by Douglas in this contest, but the eyes of the
people were on him and in 1860 the Republican party made him its
candidate for president. Some of the rails he had split were brought
into the convention; the contest between free and slave labor was
made an issue of the campaign. There were three other candidates
in the field, and the division of votes in the old parties caused
Lincoln to be elected. The southern people knew little about Lincoln
personally; they knew, however, that he led the party which wished to
destroy slavery. There had been so much disagreement and friction in
the Union that some of the southern states now decided to leave it. The
Constitution did not give the general government power to enforce a
permanent union. In course of time there came to be held two different
views about the Union,--one, generally held in the South, was that it
was “a compact between sovereign states” and that the power of the
state was supreme; the other, generally held in the North, was that
the states made up one great nation to which belonged the supreme
authority. The latter was the view held by Lincoln. He prepared for his
inaugural address by studying the Constitution, Clay’s great speech of
1850, Jackson’s proclamation against nullification, and Webster’s reply
to Hayne: locked in his dingy office he composed his inaugural address.

Before he left home, he paid a farewell visit to his aged step-parent
who had been as a mother to him. Then with his wife and three sons, he
set forth to Washington.

When he took the oath of office, it was over a divided Union. South
Carolina had seceded and several other southern states had followed its
example. Lincoln said, “the Union must be preserved” and he issued a
call for seventy-five thousand soldiers. At this call there withdrew
from the Union several states which loved the Union but believed in the
supreme power of the states and the constitutional right of secession.

The reverse at Manassas distressed but did not daunt Lincoln. As
commander-in-chief of the army and the navy, he appointed officers
and supervised their movements. There were three great military tasks
necessary for the northern forces,--to control the Mississippi River,
to blockade southern ports, and to capture Richmond. The sea forces
under Farragut and Porter successfully performed their tasks. In
Virginia one unsuccessful or incompetent general after another was put
forward and supported,--McClellan, Halleck, Pope, and Hooker. Meanwhile
the great commanders, Grant, Sheridan, and Sherman, were fighting
undiscovered in the west. At last they were brought forward and put at
the head of magnificent armies to “end the job.”

As a military measure, in 1863, President Lincoln made the emancipation
proclamation granting freedom to slaves. In November, of that year
he made his famous address, consecrating the military cemetery at
Gettysburg.

Not long before the presidential election of 1864, Lincoln issued
a call for five hundred thousand soldiers; friends urged him to
wait a few weeks as this call for troops might injure his chance of
re-election. He refused saying, “What is the presidency worth to me if
I have no country?”

In his second inaugural address are the famous words, “With malice
toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right as God
gives us to see the right, let us strive to finish the work we are
in.” The end was already in sight. The capital of the Confederacy fell
and Lee’s little army was forced to surrender. Lincoln expressed only
sympathy for the defeated and desolate South. But his plans for reunion
in peace and kindness were not to be carried out. Just as the great
victory was accomplished he was struck down by the hand of an assassin,
John Wilkes Booth. His death was an even greater loss to the South than
to the North which mourned so bitterly, the heroic man of the people,
the martyred president.




Ulysses Simpson Grant


April 27, 1822, was born Hiram Ulysses Grant, who by an error of which
you will hear later had his name changed to Ulysses Simpson Grant. His
father was Jesse Grant, an Ohio tanner. Grant’s ancestors had settled
in New England in the seventeenth century and some had served in the
French and Indian War and some had served in the Revolution, so he was
of good American stock.

When Ulysses was about ten years old, his father moved to Georgetown,
Ohio, about forty miles from Cincinnati. There he prospered and became
the owner of a farm as well as a tannery. Ulysses was not specially
fond of books, but his father was resolved that he should have a good
education. The boy was sent regularly to school and was a faithful
student. He had work to do at home too--sometimes in the tannery which
he disliked, sometimes on the farm, which he liked better. He was fond
of horses and learned to ride and drive well.

From the time he was eleven till he was seventeen, he did the plowing
and hauling on his father’s farm. His father who seems to have been
more ambitious for his son than the boy was for himself, secured an
appointment to West Point. Ulysses did not wish to go and feared he
could not pass the entrance examinations. But his father’s word was the
law of the family and so the sandy-haired, blue-eyed lad of seventeen
left his Ohio home to go to West Point. He lingered on the way to see
the sights in Philadelphia and other places.

Two weeks after he left home, he reached West Point, in May, 1839. He
passed the dreaded examinations and was enrolled among the cadets. The
Congressman who had secured the appointment for him forgot his name
and filled in the application for Ulysses Simpson Grant, and by that
name he was called. The boys nicknamed him “Uncle Sam” and called him
“Sam Grant.” He got on well in his studies, especially in mathematics
which had always been his favorite. He was more famous as a horseman,
however, than as a student. At West Point there is still shown the
place where he made a famous leap of six feet, three inches, on a big
horse named York. Except for his horsemanship the young Ohioan, quiet
in manner and careless in dress, was not much noted one way or another.
He was graduated, June, 1843, twenty-first in a class of thirty-nine.

In 1846 came war with Mexico which Grant then and forty years later
thought “one of the most unjust wars ever waged by a stronger against a
weaker nation.” He had hoped for a place in the cavalry, but was sent
in the infantry as second lieutenant.

He took part in many battles and distinguished himself by his coolness
and courage under fire. In the battle of Monterey his regiment
lacked ammunition and Lieutenant Grant volunteered to go for it to
headquarters, four miles away. The route he had to travel was exposed
to the enemy’s fire. He hung his foot on the saddle and held on to his
horse’s mane; thus swinging on the horse’s side he galloped off and
carried the message, returning unharmed.

In Mexico served many men and officers with and against whom he fought
in the War between the States. He said afterwards that the knowledge
of their character and methods which he gained during the campaign in
Mexico was very useful. In the battle of Chapultepec, Grant, with the
help of some comrades, dragged a small cannon up into the belfry of a
church and used the place as a fort with great advantage. Major Robert
E. Lee, in his report of the battle, commended the young lieutenant,
saying that “Second Lieutenant Grant behaved with distinguished
gallantry.” In 1848 Grant returned home and that year he was married.

Soon after, his regiment was ordered to California and Oregon.
Unwilling to be separated from his family, in 1854 he resigned and came
home. From his pay he had not been able to lay aside enough to defray
his expenses home and these were paid by his father.

At thirty-two he had to begin the world with a wife and children to
support. He moved to Missouri to a small tract of land belonging to his
wife. Here he cut and hauled logs and split shingles and built a cabin.
He named the place Hardscrabble, because, he said, life there was a
“hard scrabble.” He worked diligently raising corn, wheat, and potatoes
and cutting cord-wood for sale to help out his expenses, but he did not
succeed as a farmer. At the end of three years, he was two thousand
dollars in debt. Then he tried the real estate business but at that too
he failed.

“Grant did not seem to be just calculated for business, but a more
honest, generous man never lived,” said one who knew him in those
days. “I don’t believe he knew what dishonor was.”

At last he gave up the struggle in Missouri and went to Galena,
Illinois, where his brothers were carrying on a leather business. He
began work in their shop as a clerk at six hundred dollars a year.

But he did not finish out the first year. The War between the
States began. Grant helped to raise a company of soldiers in Galena
and drilled them. As Colonel Grant, he was put in charge of the
twenty-first Illinois regiment which he made the best regiment in the
state. A little later he was made brigadier-general. After several
skirmishes in the border states of Missouri and Kentucky, he went, in
February, 1862, with seventeen thousand men and a fleet of gunboats to
attack Fort Henry on the Tennessee and Fort Donelson on the Cumberland.
Fort Henry was taken by the fleet before the army reached it, and then
the land and water forces made ready to attack Fort Donelson. General
Buckner, who had been with Grant in Mexico, wrote asking Grant for
terms of surrender. “No terms other than an immediate and unconditional
surrender can be accepted,” Grant replied. “I propose to move
immediately upon your works.” As Buckner was unable to hold the fort,
he had to surrender on these terms. Grant was now made major-general.

His next plan was to attack and break the base of Confederate railroad
communications in northern Mississippi. For this purpose he marched
towards Corinth. The Confederate general, Albert Sidney Johnston,
instead of waiting to be attacked, threw his forces gallantly against
the Federal army. The battle raged the whole day, without decisive
results. That night General Buell brought Grant heavy reinforcements,
and in the next day’s battle General Johnston was killed. The
Confederates were forced back to Corinth, contending for every inch of
ground.

Grant’s third move was to divide the Confederacy by getting command of
the posts along the Mississippi River, thus cutting off the western
base of supplies. The fleet under Farragut had tried to carry out
this scheme. But Vicksburg and Port Hudson were both held by the
Confederates, and between these they controlled the river and brought
supplies from the west. Vicksburg, called “the Gibraltar of the
Mississippi,” was strongly situated. In five battles Grant drove back
the Confederate forces and in May, 1863, besieged Vicksburg, resolved
to starve it into surrender. Many said that this was a foolish attempt
and tried to persuade Lincoln to remove Grant, but Lincoln resolved
to give him a chance. Grant closed in on the Confederates and cut off
their line of supplies. In July General Pemberton asked for terms and
received this answer: “The unconditional surrender of the city and the
garrison. I have no terms other than these.” The taking of Vicksburg
was a great victory for the Federals. President Lincoln wrote Grant
a personal letter: “My dear General, I do not remember that you and
I ever met personally. I write this now as a grateful acknowledgment
for the almost inestimable service you have done the country.... When
you turned northward, I feared it was a mistake. I now wish to make a
personal acknowledgment that you were right and I was wrong. Yours very
truly, A. Lincoln.” Those who had tried to get Grant removed saw that
they too were wrong, but they lacked the president’s manly frankness
and did not confess it.

Grant was given command of all the armies in the West. He went to
Tennessee to relieve the division of the Union army under Rosecrans
which the Confederates had hemmed up in Chattanooga. It was shut in by
the Tennessee river on the north and by mountains on all other sides.
Grant, with Sherman, Sheridan and other brave generals aiding him,
marched up the mountain and fought a great battle on Lookout Mountain
“above the clouds,” by which the troops in Chattanooga were relieved.

The title of Lieutenant-General, which Washington had borne, was
revived for Grant, and he went to Washington in March, 1864, to receive
his commission from Lincoln. The president said in giving it, “As the
country herein trusts you, so, under God, will it sustain you.”

Lincoln had now found the general that he had been looking for, the
man able to lead the magnificent Federal army of seven hundred thousand
men. Grant went to Virginia, the battle-field of the Confederacy, where
for three years Lee had held his own and defeated four generals sent
with large armies against him. Grant resolved to break the Confederate
lines and to capture Richmond. He thought that one cause of the lack
of Federal success had been that the parts of the great army had not
worked well together; he tried to make them move like the parts of a
well-ordered machine. General Sherman was sent southward on a march
to Savannah to lay the country waste so that no help could be sent
to Lee’s troops. Sherman’s army covered a track of country sixty
miles wide, in which railroads, bridges, houses, and provisions were
destroyed.

It took Grant a year and it cost many lives to carry out his plan of
overcoming Lee, but he never wavered. The two great generals fought
one great battle after another. “I shall fight it out on this line
if it takes all summer,” General Grant wrote after the battle at
Spottsylvania Court House. Then came the desperate battle of Cold
Harbor. After these battles the Federals received reinforcements to
repair their losses, but none came to the southern army. There were
none to come; even the old men and the boys were already in the field.
On the second of April, 1865, the Confederates were forced to abandon
Petersburg. Lee endeavored to withdraw his array but Grant followed
close in the rear. After retreating seventy-five miles, the shattered,
starving remnant of the Confederate army was surrendered to Grant at
Appomattox Court House, April 9, 1865.

Instead of being detained as prisoners, the Confederate soldiers were
released on parole and they were allowed to retain their horses.

“They will need them for their plowing and spring work,” said Grant
with kindly wisdom.

“General,” said Lee earnestly, “there is nothing you could have done to
accomplish more good either for them or for the government.”

To honor Grant for his services, Congress created for him the rank
of general, a higher title than even Washington held. The joy of the
North at Lee’s surrender was turned to mourning by the assassination
of President Lincoln. This was an even greater calamity for the South
than for the North. Lincoln was succeeded by Andrew Johnson and there
followed a period of grave mismanagement,--especially of southern
affairs. At one time Johnson was impeached--that is, tried for
misconduct in office--and he lacked only one vote of being convicted.

Johnson wished to have Lee arrested and punished as a traitor. Grant
said that “he had accepted Lee’s surrender and he and his soldiers were
prisoners under parole and were not to be punished so long as they
obeyed the laws to which they had sworn allegiance.”

In 1868 Grant was elected president as the candidate of the Republican
party by a vote of two hundred and fourteen to eighty. He tried to
withdraw the national government more and more from the South and to
leave the state governments in control. He was re-elected in 1872 by
two hundred and eighty-six votes, showing the people’s approval of his
administration. A noteworthy act of his second term was his vetoing
the bill for the inflation of the currency, making paper money legally
equal to gold and silver.

People wanted him to serve a third term but he refused, and in 1877
started on a tour of the world. He visited Europe and Asia and was
everywhere received with honor,--as the guest of Queen Victoria, the
kings of Italy, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, the Czar of Russia, and
other rulers. Having received royal honors in many lands, he returned
in 1880 to California where he had served thirty years before as an
obscure young soldier.

His last years were burdened by business misfortunes and physical
suffering. He had invested his money in a banking business which failed
and involved him in ruin. With poverty came illness, a painful throat
disease which was to end in death.

From his sickroom in answer to words of sympathy which came from all
parts of the country, indeed of the world he sent this message: “I
am very much touched and grateful for the sympathy and interest
manifested in me by my friends and by those who have not hitherto
been regarded as my friends. I desire the good will of all, whether
heretofore friends or not.”

To make provision for his family, he set about writing his “Memoirs,”
the story of his life and battles. In pain and illness, he toiled on
and held death at bay till this work was finished, July 1, 1885. A few
days later, he died on July 23. He was laid to rest beside the Hudson
and over his remains was erected a magnificent marble tomb; over the
doorway of this is inscribed his noble words, “Let us have peace.”




Robert E. Lee

The Leader of the Confederate Armies


More and more, Americans are coming to realize that in the great War
between the States men on both sides were animated by a sense of duty
and devotion to what they thought right. On the one side, brave,
loyal-hearted men upheld the Union; on the other, men as brave and
loyal upheld the supremacy of the state. You have read how Grant, the
victor, won the love and reverence of his countrymen; no less loved and
reverenced was his defeated opponent, the great Confederate leader, Lee.

Robert Edward Lee was born January 19, 1807, at Stratford, a handsome
old country home in Virginia. His father, General Henry Lee, was the
famous “Light Horse Harry” of the Revolution. When Robert was only
four years old, General Lee moved to Alexandria in order to give his
children the benefit of better schools. From childhood Robert was an
apt and faithful student, careful to do his best at any task which he
undertook. His childhood was darkened by the illness and death of his
father. Robert cared tenderly for his invalid mother who said, “He is
both son and daughter to me.”

[Illustration: ROBERT E. LEE]

From the school at Alexandria Robert went to West Point, where at the
end of four years he was graduated second in his class. Two years after
leaving West Point, he married Mary Randolph Custis, the daughter of
Washington’s adopted son, Washington Parke Curtis. Lieutenant Lee
and his wife made their home at Arlington, a stately mansion on the
Potomac River, in sight of the city of Washington. Here he passed a
few happy months. But a soldier cannot choose his post of duty, and
Lee was summoned from home to engineer work in the West. Then came the
war with Mexico in which he took part. In this war served as privates
or officers many others destined to fame in the War between the
States--Johnston, McClellan, Pickett, Grant, Jackson. Among his brave
and able comrades, Lee made a distinguished record. In the advance on
the city of Mexico, he explored and made a road over a pathless lava
field across which he guided troops; then he rode back alone in the
darkness and rain to report to his commanding officer. General Scott
said that this midnight journey was the greatest deed of the war, and
Lee “the greatest military genius in America.”

After the war with Mexico was over, Captain Lee made a visit home. In
1852 he was made superintendent of the Military Academy at West Point.
Thence he was sent to Texas to fight against the Indians. He was in
Virginia in 1859 and he was sent to suppress John Brown’s raid. He
performed his duty at Harper’s Ferry in soldierly fashion, treated
his prisoners kindly, and turned them over to the civil authorities
to be punished for breaking the laws. In 1860 he was again in Texas,
but the next spring he returned to Virginia. The period of disunion
and secession was a sad one for Colonel Lee. He loved dearly the Union
which his father had aided to establish. He had entered its army
expecting to devote his life to its service. He believed, indeed, in
the supreme authority of the state, but he thought secession unwise and
was confident that in the Union the vexing questions about slavery and
the tariff could be settled.

“If the four million slaves in the South were mine,” he said, “I would
give them all up to keep the Union.”

But dearly as he loved the Union he thought that his first duty was to
his native state, Virginia, his second to the Union of which he was
a part. When Lincoln issued his call for troops, by General Scott’s
advice the command of the Union army was offered to Lee. He declined,
resigned his commission in the army, and accepted the command of the
Virginia forces. It was a sad day when he and his family left beautiful
Arlington which was never again to be a home. It fell into the hands of
the Union soldiers and is now the site of a great national cemetery.

Lee fought at first in western Virginia; then he was sent to aid in
fortifying the coasts of South Carolina and Georgia. Afterwards he
was put in charge of the army in Virginia, and there he remained, as
general and commander-in-chief of the southern army until the end of
the war. The southern army was small but it was commanded by brave and
able generals. Lee’s “right hand” was Stonewall Jackson, a fearless
soldier and earnest Christian, one of the greatest military leaders the
world has ever known. A famous cavalry-leader was J. E. B. Stuart, a
dashing cavalier who loved battle as a boy loves play. Both Jackson and
Stuart were killed before the war was over.

As you have been told, it was the great aim of the northern armies to
capture Richmond; it was the aim of Lee and his little army to defend
the city. Lee led his soldiers with masterly skill in the Seven Days’
Fight about Richmond. Then he marched north; having defeated Pope at
the second battle of Manassas, he advanced into Maryland and fought
a great drawn battle at Antietam, or Sharpsburg. Lee then returned
to Virginia. He fought at Fredericksburg against Burnside who had
supplanted McClellan in command. The next spring “Fighting Joe” Hooker
was defeated at Chancellorsville, but in the death of Jackson, the
Confederates sustained a greater loss than that of many battles.

Lee marched north again, and a great battle was fought at Gettysburg.
General Longstreet failed to advance as ordered, the Confederates who
had charged fell unsupported, and the day was lost. General Lee led
his crippled army back to Virginia. At Gettysburg the tide had turned
against the Confederates. From that day defeat and surrender were but
a question of time. For a long time Lee’s little army held its own in
defence of Richmond. Grant, the victor of the West, was sent against
it. It cost him a month and sixty thousand men to march seventy-five
miles. With masterly skill, Lee opposed him in the great battles of
the Wilderness, Spottsylvania Court House, and Cold Harbor, but the
Confederate line was broken at last.

Forced to give up the defense of Richmond, General Lee endeavored
to withdraw his army, but Grant followed, and the little army was
surrendered at Appomattox Court House, April 9, 1865. As Lee bade
farewell to his soldiers, they sobbed aloud and tears were in his eyes.
He said with a broken voice, “Men, we have fought the war together. I
have done my best for you. My heart is too full to say more.”

Great as had been Lee’s work in war, it was no less great in peace.
Bravely and uncomplainingly he accepted the results of defeat, and
endured the horrors of the reconstruction days. No word of bitterness
was ever heard to pass his lips. Nor would he in their hour of woe and
poverty desert his people. Wealth and position were offered him abroad,
and at home he might have had affluence by lending his name to business
enterprises. But he steadfastly refused all such offers. “I think it
better to do right,” he said, “even if we suffer in so doing, than to
incur the reproach of our consciences and posterity.”

He set himself to aid in the upbuilding and restoring of the South. At
a salary of a few hundred dollars, he became president of Washington
College, now Washington and Lee University, in Lexington, Virginia.
Wisely and conscientiously he performed his duties until the autumn
of 1870. One evening at tea his voice failed as he was about to ask a
blessing and he sank back in his chair. After lingering a few days, he
died October 12, 1870.




David G. Farragut

Our First Admiral


David Glasgow Farragut, the first admiral of the American navy, was
born near Knoxville, Tennessee, July 5, 1801. He was the son of a
Spaniard, a native of the island of Minorca, who came to America in
1776 and after helping the country fight for its rights settled here
to enjoy them. At the end of the eighteenth century, Tennessee was
a sparsely-settled region, occupied by a few hardy pioneers and by
roaming Indians. One day when Mrs. Farragut was alone at home with her
two little sons a band of Indians attacked the cabin. The brave mother
sent her children to hide in the loft and guarded the door with an ax
till help came.

When David was about seven, Mr. Farragut was put in charge of a gunboat
on the Mississippi. His family moved near New Orleans, and there Mrs.
Farragut died of yellow fever about a year later. Just before her
illness, a stranger, an old man who had had a sunstroke, had been taken
into her home and cared for. This stranger was the father of Commodore
David Porter. The grateful naval officer offered to adopt and educate
one of the Farragut boys. After the mother’s death, this offer was
accepted for David. The little fellow was sent to school and at the age
of ten he became a midshipman in the navy. He was very small for his
age, and once when he went ashore a group of idlers gathered around
and made sport of “the baby officer.” One waggish fellow sprinkled him
with water from a watering pot to “make him grow.” This led to a fight
between David’s tormentors and the sailors in which David took active
part. After it was over, someone remarked that “the baby officer was
three pounds of uniform and seventy pounds of fight.”

In October, 1812, David sailed with Captain Porter on the Essex.
Captain Porter was ordered to join the squadron in the Atlantic if he
could: if not, to use his own discretion. He cruised about the Atlantic
several months, capturing several British merchant-vessels, but not
finding the American squadron. He then decided to make a cruise in the
Pacific. There he captured several British vessels and gave timely
warning to American ships that had not heard of the war. At one time
provisions were scarce, and David, like the others, was on a short
allowance of bread and water. In May, 1813, David, then twelve years
old, was put in charge of a captured English vessel to take it to port.
The English captain was very angry at having to take orders from the
“baby commodore,” as Farragut was often called, but Farragut executed
his orders with exactness and dignity.

In March, 1814, the Essex, off the coast of South America, was attacked
by two English vessels and captured after a desperate fight in which
the Americans lost one hundred and twenty-four men. Farragut was “a
man on occasions,” and Captain Porter commended his battery in this
action. The American sailors were made prisoners on parole and they
were exchanged only a few weeks before the treaty of peace was made.
The time was improved by Farragut in attending school. Between his
cruises he was generally at school studying diligently, and at eighteen
he stood the examinations required for a lieutenant, though he did not
receive his promotion till several years later.

In 1822 Farragut went with his friend, Commodore Porter, to fight
against the pirates which thronged the West Indian waters. The American
fleet was composed of small fast-sailing vessels and of boats called
the “mosquito fleet.” They had some exciting adventures and encounters
with the pirates, whom they succeeded in driving from most of their
haunts. A more formidable foe than the pirates was yellow fever.
Twenty-five officers were attacked and of those twenty-three died;
Farragut was one of the two who recovered. Soon after his return to
America, Lieutenant Farragut was put in charge of the Brandywine to
carry Lafayette to France.

In 1833 he went to Charleston under orders to uphold the revenue laws
of the United States which South Carolina had threatened to nullify.
The danger was averted and for the present he was not called upon to
serve against his countrymen. During the years which followed he made
many cruises but saw no active service. He was an excellent officer.
One who knew him said, “Never was the crew of a man-of-war better
disciplined or more contented and happy. The moment all hands were
called and Farragut took the trumpet, every man under him was alive
and eager for duty.”

In 1850 Farragut and three other officers were appointed to draw up a
book of regulations for the navy. They devoted eighteen months of hard
work to the task and made an excellent manual. A few years later the
book appeared with a few changes; the names of the four men who had
prepared it were omitted and the credit was given to men who had really
done none of the work. The fair-minded and hard-working young officer
was naturally indignant at this injustice.

Later, he was sent to California and spent four years establishing
navy-yards near San Francisco. He was now captain, which was then the
highest rank in the American navy. On his return to Washington in 1858,
he was put in charge of a new vessel, the Brooklyn. This was very
different from the old sailing-ships on which he had served, being one
of the first steam war-vessels in our navy.

The clouds of the War between the States were now gathering over the
country, greatly to Farragut’s distress. He was a southerner by birth
but from boyhood he had been in the nation’s service and his strongest
affections were for the American navy.

“God forbid that I should raise my hand against the South,” he said.

Yet when the war broke out he felt that he must choose the national
cause. In January, 1862, he was sent in charge of a squadron to secure
the Mississippi River for the Union. He was to capture Fort Jackson
and Fort St. Philip which defended New Orleans, then take the city, and
afterwards sail up the river, subjecting the forts along the banks. He
was in charge of the largest and best-equipped fleet that had ever been
led by an American commander. It consisted of forty-eight vessels. An
army of fifteen thousand soldiers under General Butler was sent to aid
in the capture of New Orleans. Below the forts commanding the city, was
a barricade of old vessels and logs fastened together with iron chains;
above these was the Confederate fleet of fifteen vessels. For a week
Captain Farragut’s mortar boats rained shells on the forts, then his
gunboats broke the barricade. At four o’clock on the morning of April
the twenty-fourth, his squadron passed the forts which had held back
the British in 1815. Then they engaged in a desperate battle with the
little Confederate fleet. Every vessel of it was captured or wrecked.
Four days later the besieged forts surrendered, and on the first of May
the Union troops under Butler took possession of New Orleans. Farragut
was ordered to “pass or attack and capture” the Confederate forts
between New Orleans and Memphis. He accordingly went to Vicksburg, but
his expedition failed for lack of land-forces to support the attack.
July 4, 1863, Vicksburg was taken by General Grant, and a few days
later, Port Hudson was surrendered. This gave the Union forces entire
control of the river. For his valiant and efficient service, Farragut
was rewarded in 1862 with the rank of rear-admiral, created for his
benefit. Thus he was the first admiral in the United States navy. Later
he was made vice-admiral, and in 1866 he became admiral, each of the
three ranks being created in his honor.

While Farragut’s squadron was striving to gain control of the
Mississippi, a battle took place on the Atlantic coast which marked the
beginning of a new era in naval warfare, the end of wooden war-ships
and the use of iron vessels. The Confederates captured a United
States vessel, the Merrimac, removed its masts, covered it with iron,
and fitted it with an iron prow. This iron-clad vessel attacked and
destroyed several Union vessels. It was attacked by the Monitor, an
iron-covered vessel designed by Captain John Ericsson and commanded by
Lieutenant Worden. It carried larger guns than had ever before been
used on a vessel. A fierce battle was fought in which neither of the
iron-clads was seriously injured, and the Merrimac finally withdrew.

Leaving the Mississippi squadron in charge of Porter, who was also
a rear-admiral now, Farragut went to the Atlantic coast. As soon as
vessels could be refitted, he set forth in the summer of 1864 to
capture Mobile, an important seaport of the South. With twenty-four
war-ships and four iron-clads he entered Mobile Bay which was commanded
by two strong forts. In order to overlook the fleet and direct its
action, the admiral stationed himself in the rigging of his vessel,
despite the protests of his men against his occupying a place of such
danger. A submarine mine sunk one of his vessels with almost its entire
crew; at this disaster the vessel which was leading the fleet stopped.
Admiral Farragut ordered his own vessel, the Hartford, “full speed”
in the van and led the way into the bay. The entire Confederate fleet
was destroyed, and the forts were taken in a few days, thus giving the
Federals control of the Gulf. Of the battle of Mobile Bay Farragut
said, “It was one of the hardest-earned victories of my life, and the
most desperate battle I ever fought since the days of the Essex.”

While Farragut was in the Gulf making ready to attack Mobile, in June,
1864, a brilliant naval battle was fought off the coast of France. This
was between the Federal Kearsarge, commanded by Captain Winslow, and
the Confederate Alabama under Captain Semmes. After an hour’s desperate
battle, the Alabama was sunk.

A few months later, occurred one of the most daring deeds of the war.
The Confederate vessel, the Albemarle, was destroyed at night by a
torpedo from a little boat commanded by Lieutenant Cushing. Lieutenant
Cushing had volunteered for the service, fully recognizing the danger
to which he would be exposed. His boat was sunk, and only he and one of
the crew escaped by swimming.




Clara Barton

The President of the American Red Cross Society


War at best brings with it terrible suffering, hardship and sickness,
wounds and death. Gratitude is due those who labor to alleviate
such sufferings. Among these, women have ever been foremost. During
the Crimean War in Europe, Florence Nightingale and other noble
Englishwomen went to the Crimea to nurse the sick and wounded soldiers.

In our War between the States a few years later, similar services
were rendered by many self-sacrificing women, both North and South.
Two great organizations, the Sanitary Commission and the Christian
Commission, were formed in the North to collect supplies and forward
them to the needy and suffering soldiers. Mary Livermore, who was at
the head of the Sanitary Commission, wrote an interesting account of
its work.

While these were busy at home, other women were at work in the
hospitals and on the battle-fields, caring for sick and wounded
soldiers. One of these nurses was Dorothea Dix. During the war, she was
a superintendent of hospital nurses; after the war, she devoted herself
to improving the conditions of prison life.

Another hospital nurse was Clara Barton, afterwards so prominently
identified with the Red Cross movement. She was born in Massachusetts
in 1830. In young womanhood she taught several years, then she secured
a clerkship in Washington. At the beginning of the War between the
States, she resigned her position to work in army-hospitals, where she
was called “an angel of mercy.”

After the war, broken down in health, she went abroad. In Europe
she became interested in the work of the Red Cross societies, which
were doing a noble work and had already secured the co-operation of
twenty-two nations. These organizations were due to the efforts of a
Swiss gentleman who in 1859 visited the field of Solferino where, in
a battle between the Austrians and the French, thousands of soldiers
were killed and thousands were wounded. The medical aid at hand was
pitifully inadequate; the sight of the sufferings of the wounded
soldiers led this Swiss to plan the formation of societies for the
relief of wounded soldiers. Such a society was formed at Geneva in
1864, and a badge, a red cross on a white ground, was adopted which was
to be worn by those in its service.

By the efforts of Miss Barton, in 1881 the United States co-operated in
this work. A Red Cross society was formed of which Miss Barton became
president. In 1896 its members helped in the relief of the Armenians;
they did noble work in the Spanish-American War in 1898, and in the
Boer War the next year.

The work of the Red Cross society is not limited to the relief of the
victims of war. In times of calamity and disaster, it takes speedy
relief to those stricken by flood, famine, or pestilence. During
the floods of 1884, Miss Barton in a relief-boat traveled thousands
of miles up and down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers, distributing
food, clothing, and supplies. The Johnstown flood of 1889 left four
thousand people dead and twenty thousand homeless. The Red Cross
Society hastened to the relief of the sufferers. For five months its
agents worked amid scenes of want and distress, distributing over two
hundred thousand dollars’ worth of food, clothes, furniture, and other
supplies. They did similar work at the great flood of Galveston in
1900, and are always ready to extend a helping hand where it is needed.




George B. Dewey


George Dewey, the third admiral of the United States navy, was born
in Vermont, December 26, 1837. He was descended from a Puritan who
emigrated to Massachusetts about 1633. As a boy, George Dewey was
mischievous and daring and not fond of study. His father, however,
realizing the importance of education, kept him at school and insisted
on his applying himself.

He entered the Naval Academy when he was seventeen and was graduated
in 1858, fifth in his large class. His first active service was in
Farragut’s attack on New Orleans, and here he showed courage and
coolness under fire.

In attempting to pass Port Hudson, his ship, the Mississippi, was
riddled with shot and shell. Then it was run ashore and set on fire
by Captain Smith and Dewey to prevent its falling into the hands of
the Confederates. In his official report of this affair, Captain
Smith said, “I consider that I should be neglecting a most important
duty should I omit to mention the coolness of my executive officer,
Mr. Dewey, and the steady, fearless, and gallant manner in which the
officers and men of the Mississippi defended her, and the orderly and
quiet manner in which she was abandoned after being thirty-five minutes
aground, under the fire of the enemy’s batteries.”

After the war Farragut said to Dewey’s father, “Your son George is a
worthy and brave officer and some day will make his mark.”

It was long, however, before the opportunity came for him to do so.
Meanwhile he went quietly on, performing the duties of his profession.
For two years after the War between the States, he was instructor
in the Naval Academy. In 1884 he was promoted captain and in 1897
commodore. He was now sixty years old, and while he was recognized as a
brave and able officer, the prospect seemed that he would be retired at
sixty-two, according to the rules of the navy, without gaining special
fame.

But this was not to be the case. His opportunity was to come, and
because he was ready for it, he was to attain a fame equal to that won
by any other naval commander of his country. In January, 1898, he was
ordered to take command of the Asiatic squadron; that spring while he
was on Pacific waters, war was declared between the United States and
Spain.

Cuba, one of its first discoveries, had remained subject to Spain while
one after another of her New World possessions slipped from her grasp.
Instead of ruling the colony wisely, Spain governed it with severity
and injustice. The oppressed people made more than one effort to gain
freedom. One attempt after another was unsuccessful, but in 1895 there
broke out a rebellion so desperate that the Spaniards were not able
to suppress it. The cruel General Weyler was put in command of the
army in Cuba. In order to keep the natives from taking part in the
insurrection, he formed what were called “concentration camps;” towns
were surrounded by barbed wire fences and the inclosures were guarded
by Spanish soldiers; in these were confined men, women, and children.
Foul water, lack of food, and lack of proper sanitary regulations
killed thousands in these camps. Through the Red Cross Society, the
Americans sent food and supplies to the sufferers.

When our Consul in Havana reported that many Americans were among the
starving sufferers, the United States protested; finally, Weyler was
recalled and the American prisoners and the helpless natives were
released.

In the winter of 1898 the Maine, an American battleship commanded by
Captain Sigsbee, was in Havana harbor on a friendly visit. On the
fifteenth of February, it was blown up by a submarine mine and two
hundred and sixty-six Americans were killed. No one could find out who
put the mine there nor who exploded it. This incident excited such
indignation in America that Congress authorized President McKinley to
use the army and navy to force Spain to give up Cuba. This caused Spain
to declare war against the United States.

The war with Spain began, April 21, 1898. Three days later, orders
were cabled to Dewey, who was at Hong Kong, China: “Proceed at once
to the Philippine Islands. Commence operations, particularly against
the Spanish fleet. You must capture or destroy the vessels. Use utmost
endeavor.”

As Dewey sailed from Hong Kong, he signalled to his fleet: “Keep cool
and obey orders.” The night of April the thirtieth the vessels reached
Manila; ignoring the mines and batteries, they steamed in single file
between the forts which guard the wide entrance of the bay. A little
after five o’clock on the morning of May 1, 1898, began the battle of
Manila Bay. The Spanish fleet was commanded by Admiral Montojo, one of
the ablest of the Spanish officers. His fleet and the batteries opened
fire on the Americans. Two submarine mines were exploded; fortunately,
they did no damage and they did not deter Dewey, who had been with
Farragut at the battle of Mobile Bay when the brave admiral sailed over
torpedoes.

Dewey coolly watched the Spanish cannonade for awhile, and then quietly
said to the captain of his flag-ship, the Olympia: “You may fire when
ready, Gridley.” With a shout, “Remember the Maine,” the Americans
fired. Their vessels, single file, passed the Spanish squadron, firing
broadsides with deadly effect. Then they turned and repeated the
maneuver. This was done five times in the course of two hours. The
Spanish ships one after another were sunk, disabled, or blown up. At
half past seven o’clock Commodore Dewey withdrew out of range of the
Spanish batteries, and breakfast was served. He then returned to the
attack and in two hours the Americans completed the destruction of the
Spanish fleet, which was superior to their own in ships, men, and guns.
The Spaniards fought bravely, but they were poor marksmen; they had
two hundred men killed and lost their squadron of twelve vessels. The
Americans did not lose a ship and they had only seven men wounded and
none killed.

Dewey received from Congress a vote of thanks and the rank of
rear-admiral. He remained in charge at Manila till relieved by a
military governor. The war was over then, Spain was defeated, and Cuba
free. There was no further occasion for his services. In 1899 he left
Manila; after a leisurely cruise, in the autumn he reached the United
States, where he was received with enthusiasm.




Andrew Carnegie

The Steel King


The United States has been called “the land of the poor man’s
opportunity.” More than one barefoot boy in it has passed from a
log cabin to the White House. In no other country have there been
such rises from poverty to wealth and position. There is often much
to condemn in the methods by which vast wealth is acquired, but the
task requires ability and talent of a kind, and the careers of these
“captains of industry,” as they are well termed, are regarded with
interest.

A typical man of this class is Andrew Carnegie, who has risen from
extreme poverty to vast wealth. He was born in 1837 in Scotland. His
father, a master weaver, lost work when machines took the place of
hand-looms; he emigrated to the United States when Andrew was a boy
of eleven. Andrew began work when he was twelve as a bobbin-boy in a
cotton factory in Pennsylvania, at weekly wages of a dollar and twenty
cents.

When he was fourteen, he became a telegraph messenger boy and earned
three dollars a week. In his spare time, he learned telegraphy and
became an expert operator.

He was shown a model of a sleeping car of which he was quick to see
the advantages; his first business investment was in a sleeping car
company, and the success of this laid the foundation of his fortune.

Later on, he became interested in iron works of various kinds. He
foresaw that iron bridges would largely take the place of wooden ones.
He formed a company to make the parts for iron bridges. Later, he saw
the superiority of steel over iron. In 1868 he introduced into America
the Bessemer process of making steel. He acquired one after another
seven great iron and steel works; moreover, he acquired coal and iron
fields and railways and steamboats to control transportation.

In 1889 his plant at Homestead was the scene of a strike, one of the
fiercest contests in America between capital and organized labor. A
number of workmen and detectives were killed, and the militia had to be
called out to put down the riot.

In 1899 Carnegie’s interest in different iron and steel plants were
consolidated; in 1902 there was formed the United States Steel
Corporation, a vast trust with a capital of over a billion dollars,
which employs forty thousand people. The year that this trust was
formed Carnegie retired from business: he received for his share in the
trust two hundred and fifty million dollars’ worth of bonds bearing
five per cent. interest, thus securing him an income of about fourteen
million dollars a year. The Steel King, his wife, and daughter, make
their home at Skibo Castle, a magnificent residence in Scotland.

Mr. Carnegie says that a man who has accumulated a great fortune ought
to share it with the people. Among the objects which he considers most
worthy the aid of men of wealth, he names universities, free libraries,
hospitals, public parks, swimming baths, public halls, and church
buildings. His own favorite charity is the aid of public libraries to
which he has given millions of dollars. In 1902 he gave ten million
dollars to found Carnegie Institution in Washington “for promotion of
study and research.”


THE END




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized or underlined text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

  Some illustrations have been moved to locations near the text they
    represent.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIEF BIOGRAPHIES FROM AMERICAN HISTORY, FOR THE FIFTH AND SIXTH GRADES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


