The Project Gutenberg eBook of The American Red Cross Magazine (Vol. 8, No. 2, April 1913)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The American Red Cross Magazine (Vol. 8, No. 2, April 1913)

Author: American National Red Cross

Release date: January 20, 2025 [eBook #75163]

Language: English

Original publication: Washington, D.C: The American Red Cross, 1913

Credits: hekula03 and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN RED CROSS MAGAZINE (VOL. 8, NO. 2, APRIL 1913) ***






[Illustration:

             VOLUME EIGHT      APRIL, 1913       NUMBER TWO

                              THE AMERICAN
                                RED CROSS
                                MAGAZINE

                  ISSUED FROM THE NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS
                            WASHINGTON, D. C.

                  FOUNDED TO AID IN THE PREVENTION AND
                 ALLEVIATION OF HUMAN SUFFERING IN TIMES
                            OF PEACE AND WAR]




CONTENTS


    American Red Cross Officers                                2

    Form of Bequest                                            3

    Frontispiece                                               4

    Opinion and Comment                                        5

        New name, new paper, new department.
        Mayor Gaynor’s Southern Flood Relief Committee.
        Cincinnati Chapter wide awake.
        Chapter news wanted for publication.
        Red Cross law and those who violate it.
        Our countrymen’s splendid service in Turkey.
        Brigadier-General Carroll A. Devol, U. S. A.
        Physicians will help the Red Cross.
        The forty-ninth State Board.
        The Red Cross in Baltimore.
        The Red Cross Building.

    Vivid Glimpses of the American Red Cross in Turkey        12

        Fighting the Cholera in San Stefano.
        Situation in Salonica.
        Red Cross Work for Refugees in Western Asia Minor.
        Activities of the Red Crescent Society.
        Savages four hundred years ago.
        Faik Pasha Della-Sudda.

    Red Cross and White Cross in Mexico                       27

    Dynamite Explosion at Baltimore                           33

    Public Works and Relief in China                          34

    Nicaraguan Famine Relief                                  39

    Important Conference on Red Cross Christmas Seals         41

    What the Red Cross Seal has done for Brooklyn             45

    First Aid Department                                      48

    First Aid in Australia                                    52

    Red Cross Nursing Service                                 54

        Rural Nursing.
        Home Nursing and First Aid Instruction for Women.

    The Red Cross at the Inauguration                         60

    Red Cross Endowment Fund                                  63

    Advertising Section                                       65




THE AMERICAN RED CROSS


_President_

    HON. WILLIAM H. TAFT

_Vice-President_

    MR. ROBERT W. DE FOREST

_Treasurer_

    HON. SHERMAN ALLEN

_Counselor_

    HON. WILLIAM MARSHALL BULLITT

_National Director_

    MR. ERNEST P. BICKNELL

_Secretary_

    MR. CHARLES L. MAGEE

CENTRAL COMMITTEE

_Appointed by the President of the United States._

    Major General George W. Davis, U. S. A. (Retired), _Chairman_.
    Honorable Huntington Wilson, Assistant Secretary of State,
      To represent the Department of State.
    Honorable Sherman Allen, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury,
      To represent the Department of the Treasury.
    Brigadier General George H. Torney, Surgeon General, U. S. Army,
      To represent the War Department.
    Rear Admiral Charles F. Stokes. Surgeon General, U. S. Navy,
      To represent the Navy Department.
    Honorable William Marshall Bullitt, Solicitor General,
      To represent the Department of Justice.

_Elected by the Board of Incorporators._

    Miss Mabel T. Boardman, Washington, D. C.
    Mr. Robert W. de Forest, New York, N. Y.
    Colonel A. G. Kaufman, Charleston, S. C.
    Judge W. W. Morrow, San Francisco, Cal.
    Honorable H. Kirke Porter, Pittsburgh, Pa.
    Honorable James Tanner, Washington, D. C.

_Elected by Delegates._

    Brigadier General Charles Bird, U. S. A. (Retired).
    Mr. William W. Farnam, New Haven, Conn.
    Mr. John M. Glenn, New York, N. Y.
    Honorable Charles Nagel, Washington, D. C.
    Honorable Charles D. Norton, New York, N. Y.
    Honorable Beekman Winthrop, Washington, D. C.




FORM OF BEQUEST


A will in the form following may be used to bequeath money for the
purposes of the Red Cross. It would be well to have the same signed by
THREE WITNESSES in the presence of the testator and of each other.

All legacies, not otherwise specified, are applied to the Endowment Fund.

    I, A. B., of __________ (testator’s domicil), hereby make and
    publish the following as my last will and testament:

    I give and bequeath to the American National Red Red Cross,
    a corporation in the District of Columbia, created by Act of
    Congress of the United States of America, its successors and
    assigns, the sum of

                                                       ____ Dollars.

                           (A. B.) __________

    Signed, sealed, published and declared by the above named A.
    B. as and for his last will and testament, in the presence of
    us, who have hereunto subscribed our names at his request as
    witnesses thereto, in the presence of the said testator and of
    each other.

                                                          __________

                                                          __________

                                                          __________




[Illustration: ALAMEDA PARK, MEXICO CITY, SCENE OF FIGHTING IN RECENT
REVOLUTION.

© Underwood & Underwood]




                                   THE
                            AMERICAN RED CROSS
                                 MAGAZINE

             VOLUME EIGHT       APRIL, 1913       NUMBER TWO




Opinion and Comment


NEW NAME, NEW PAPER, NEW DEPARTMENT

Unless attention is specifically called to the fact, our readers may
not notice that with this issue they receive a MAGAZINE instead of a
BULLETIN. That time-tried query of the cynic, “What’s in a name?” may be
flung at us, and our answer will be that the contents and character of
this publication are more in keeping with the accepted idea of a magazine
than of a bulletin. At any rate, we like the new name better than the
old, and we hope our readers will approve our taste. But whatever may
be the verdict upon the slight change of name, we feel assured that we
shall hear only approval of the heavier and better paper on which the
magazine is printed. We hope also that the new department of “Opinion
and Comment” may prove acceptable. Furthest from our thought is any idea
that the MAGAZINE is perfect, and any concrete suggestions of improvement
which readers may offer will be cordially received and given careful
consideration.


MAYOR GAYNOR’S SOUTHERN FLOOD RELIEF COMMITTEE

During the Mississippi River flood in the spring of 1912, Mayor Gaynor,
of New York, appointed a committee to collect money for relief purposes.
Mr. Robert W. de Forest, head of the New York County Chapter of the Red
Cross, was made chairman, and Mr. Robert Adamson, the Mayor’s secretary,
became secretary of the committee. Among the prominent members were
officers of the New York Southern Society. This committee undertook its
duties with such vigor and effectiveness that it became much the largest
contributor to the flood relief fund placed in the hands of the Red Cross
for expenditure. The committee held its final meeting in Mayor Gaynor’s
office on January 21, 1913, when the secretary presented an interesting
account of the work accomplished.

Money was received from all parts of the country, although the greater
part was contributed by residents of New York City. The New York Southern
Society received $14,281.05. From this sum $10,000 was paid to Mr. Jacob
H. Schiff, treasurer for the Mayor’s committee. The Southern Society
also paid all expenses of the campaign for both itself and the Mayor’s
committee, amounting to $1,612.49, and forwarded $600 directly to flood
sufferers. This left a balance in the hands of the Southern Society of
$2,068.56, which later was turned over to the Red Cross. Including the
$10,000 paid in by the Southern Society, the Mayor’s committee received a
total of $67,322.39, all of which was transmitted to the Red Cross.

Summarizing the work of both the Southern Society and the Mayor’s
committee it appears that the total collections amounted to $71,601.44,
of which $600 went direct to the flood district, $1,612.49 was paid for
expenses and $69,390.95 was turned over to the Red Cross.

By invitation of the committee the national director of the Red Cross
attended the final meeting and gave an account of the relief operations
as carried on in behalf of the quarter of a million persons whose homes
were affected in the 15,000 square miles of country inundated.


CINCINNATI CHAPTER WIDE AWAKE

Good news comes from the Cincinnati Chapter of the Red Cross, where Mr.
Julius Fleischman is chairman and Miss Annie Laws secretary. A permanent
office has been taken at 220 West Seventh street, and Miss Hilda M.
Reinecke, a well known nurse, has been placed in charge. Miss Reinecke
will also serve as instructor in home nursing, for which classes are now
being organized. During the flood in Cincinnati in January the Chapter
participated actively in relief operations in co-operation with the
committee appointed by the mayor, who, by the way, is an active member of
the executive committee of the Chapter. Plans are in contemplation for
other important activities, and no great prophetic power is required to
predict a useful career for the Chapter.


CHAPTER NEWS WANTED FOR PUBLICATION

It is hoped to devote an increasing amount of space in the RED CROSS
MAGAZINE to accounts of the work and plans of Chapters. For this reason
chairmen and secretaries are invited to send in reports and notes of
anything of interest in which the Chapters are engaged or which they
are contemplating. In this way the experience of one Chapter will be
made available for the help and guidance of others. While establishing
policies and strengthening other parts of the national organization the
creation and upbuilding of Chapters have been necessarily retarded. It is
believed the time has come for a vigorous effort to bring the Chapters
into their proper place of importance in the Red Cross scheme of things.
Officers of Chapters are invited to study the little handbook recently
published with a view to finding suggestions for local activities of
an interesting and useful character. It is to be remembered that the
handbook is not intended to specify all the activities permissible to
a Chapter, but is meant to define in a broad way the legitimate field
for Red Cross activities, with a few suggestions of specific lines of
work which are consistent with the purposes of the society. The national
director will be glad to correspond with Chapters which contemplate
embarking in new work. Reports or items of Chapter news intended for the
MAGAZINE should be sent to the national director.


RED CROSS LAW AND THOSE WHO VIOLATE IT

That persons who use the name or emblem of the Red Cross illegally, do
so, as a rule, in ignorance of the federal law prohibiting such use, and
are quick to discontinue the violation when their attention is called
to the statute, is a fact frequently demonstrated. A recent instance in
point was that of the William Windhorst Company, of Cincinnati. This
company had issued some attractive advertising matter which contained
the Red Cross emblem. As soon as it was informed that this was in
violation of law, the company took prompt measures to recall and destroy
the objectionable printed matter and to inform its customers that it
holds the American Red Cross in the highest respect and would, under no
circumstances, knowingly infringe upon its rights.

Another striking illustration of the same spirit was that in which Mr.
Arthur Letts, proprietor of a large department store in Los Angeles,
not only discarded all use of the Red Cross in his own advertising, but
issued an order to his buyers that no goods bearing the name or emblem of
the Red Cross should be purchased or sold in his store.

Members of the American Red Cross everywhere who observe locally the
use of the name or emblem on signs or tags or vehicles or for other
advertising purposes are urged to call the attention of the users to the
federal law which prohibits such use. The secretary of the Red Cross in
Washington will always be pleased to learn of such efforts and their
results. If a user declines to discontinue the practice, the member of
the Red Cross who has called his attention to the law is invited to send
the user’s name and address to the secretary in Washington, together with
a description of the character of the violation observed. A copy of the
law will be sent to any one on request.


OUR COUNTRYMEN’S SPLENDID SERVICE IN TURKEY

Every member of the Red Cross who reads the several short reports from
Turkey in this number of the RED CROSS MAGAZINE must be stirred by a
deep sense of pride in the great work of humanity which is being carried
on by the Constantinople Chapter of the American Red Cross. In the
dreadful cholera camp of San-Stefano, in the hospitals filled with sick
and wounded soldiers in Constantinople, among the starving refugees,
children, women and old men, in Salonica and Asia Minor, the story is the
same. Brave men and women giving of their time and strength and skill,
disregarding danger and hardship and forgetful of their own personal
affairs, are making a record of effective accomplishment under extreme
difficulties in that foreign country which should touch the deepest
springs of American patriotism. Slight, indeed, as compared to this
splendid service is our duty and privilege of giving something of our
abundance wherewith to sustain these efforts.


BRIGADIER-GENERAL CARROLL A. DEVOL, U. S. A.

When the Red Cross first knew him he was Major Carroll A. Devol, U.
S. A. He was then performing a herculean task in the relief of San
Francisco, and was doing the job in such a manner as to arouse general
admiration for his executive ability, his promptness and his calmness
under extremely trying conditions. Since those days he has proved his
mettle in relief work for the Red Cross following the great storm at
Hattiesburg and Purvis, Mississippi, and after a great fire of two years
ago at Colon, Panama. On the Canal Zone, where he has for some years been
United States Quartermaster for the Canal Commission, he was instrumental
in establishing a very active and efficient Chapter of the Red Cross.

All this leads up to the announcement that Major Devol, after promotion
to the rank of colonel, has now been appointed a brigadier general, and
the Red Cross, could it express itself through its MAGAZINE, would extend
to him its hand in hearty congratulation and good wishes. He has been a
strong and reliable friend of the Red Cross at all times, and through
his unselfish devotion has done much to advance its cause and establish
its good name. While his well deserved promotion has come as a result of
eminent services in the army, we shall no doubt be pardoned for utilizing
this opportunity of recalling his great services to the Red Cross.


PHYSICIANS WILL HELP THE RED CROSS

In the RED CROSS MAGAZINE for January, 1913, announcement was made of
the appointment, by the American Medical Association, of a committee
whose duty it was to confer with the American Red Cross with a view to
establishing a comprehensive system of co-operation between the Red Cross
and the medical profession of the United States. The committee has proved
to be prompt and active. Following is a copy of a circular letter which
has been sent to all the county medical societies in the country. It will
be found to contain a clear outline of the co-operative plan proposed by
the committee and approved by the executive committee of the Red Cross:

                                                  February 14, 1913.

    TO THE SECRETARY,
      County Medical Society,

    DEAR SIR:

    The undersigned have been constituted a committee by the
    President of the American Medical Association to cooperate with
    the American Red Cross, in the matter of medical work.

    The Committee feels that a great deal of substantial good will
    come to all communities by providing a body of representative
    physicians of approved qualifications to direct or participate
    in medical work carried on by the Red Cross in different
    localities in times of emergencies and to advise with the
    representatives of that society on questions of medical policy
    and procedure. Besides its activity in emergency relief work,
    the Red Cross is engaged in an educational campaign for the
    mitigation of human suffering and the saving of lives. So
    far it has extended this movement only to the teaching of
    prevention of accidents and first aid to the injured, but it is
    hoped in future that it shall include popular instruction in
    the prevention of disease. These medical committees are not in
    any way bound to this educational work of the Red Cross, but
    members of the committees who may be interested are invited to
    correspond with the First Aid Department of the Red Cross.

    In the opinion of this committee, the plan may be properly
    considered under the following headings:

    1. OBJECT. Primarily this service is designed to meet local
    emergencies when conditions of disaster are such as to call for
    the intervention of the Red Cross. When exigencies come about
    in any community the Red Cross would be glad to feel that it
    might call upon carefully selected physicians in that community
    to lend their aid in the medical work incident to the situation.

    2. ORGANIZATION. It is desired to have in every county a
    central committee of five physicians, two of whom shall be
    the President and Secretary of the County Medical Society,
    _ex officio_. The President of the County Medical Society
    shall select the other three members, preferably from the list
    of councilors or of the executive committee. This committee
    should be designated the “Committee on Red Cross Medical
    Work.” The names and residences of the members, immediately
    after organization, should be reported to the chairman of the
    American Medical Association. In case of disaster, requiring
    relief action by the Red Cross, these county committees will
    be called upon to nominate qualified medical men in their
    respective counties for Red Cross service. The committees will
    also serve in an advisory medical capacity to the Red Cross in
    time of disaster and in other lines of Red Cross activity as
    indicated in a preceding paragraph.

    3. QUALIFICATIONS. The certification of physicians by County
    Committees will be accepted as ample evidence of the physical,
    moral and professional qualifications of the gentlemen
    recommended for appointment. It may be pertinent to state that
    service in time of disaster may entail severe physical effort
    and physical fitness of appointees to perform hard work is,
    therefore, important.

    4. COMPENSATION. In some instances the Red Cross may require
    the services of physicians at a distance from their places of
    residence and for varying periods. Under these conditions the
    Red Cross will be prepared to pay traveling expenses and a
    moderate honorarium to be agreed upon between the physicians
    and the National Director of the Red Cross.

    It will be obvious to you that the arrangement here proposed
    is primarily intended to provide for emergencies which may
    suddenly arise in any community or, on the other hand, may
    happily never occur. Thus it may be that the committee which
    we are inviting you to create may never be called into action,
    while, on the other hand, it may have occasion to perform a
    very great public service. Your cooperation in the completion
    of this plan at as early a date as convenient will be
    appreciated.

    Please address all communications bearing upon the contents of
    this letter to the Chairman, Doctor George M. Kober, care The
    American Red Cross, 715 Union Trust Building, Washington, D. C.

                           Very respectfully,

                                              GEORGE M. KOBER, M.D.,
                                              _Chairman._

                                              F. A. WINTER,
                                              _Lt. Colonel, Medical
                                              Corps, U. S. Army._

                                              E. M. BLACKWELL,
                                              _Surgeon, U. S. Navy._

    At a meeting of the Executive Committee of the American
    National Red Cross held in Washington, D. C., February 14,
    1913, the foregoing plan of cooperation between the medical
    profession and the Red Cross was unanimously approved.

                                  GEORGE W. DAVIS,
                                  _Major General, U. S. A., retired,
                                  Chairman Central Committee._

    CHARLES L. MAGEE, _Secretary_.

Many replies are coming from county medical societies indicating a
cordial acceptance of the committee’s plan. It may be said, in this
connection, that the medical profession has always been generous and
responsive in the highest degree in all its relations with the Red Cross.
The purpose of the new plan is to provide a simple system by means of
which this cordial relationship may become more effective.


THE FORTY-NINTH STATE BOARD

The New Mexico State Board of the American Red Cross was appointed on
February 26, 1913, this being the forty-ninth Board organized since the
inception of the State Board form of organization.

Immediately the new States of Arizona and New Mexico were admitted to the
Union the first steps looking to the organization of Red Cross Boards
therein were taken. The cordiality with which Hon. William C. McDonald,
Governor of New Mexico, and Hon. George W. P. Hunt, Governor of Arizona,
entered into the negotiations was keenly appreciated by the Red Cross
officers at Washington, and it is hoped that the announcement of the
completion of the Arizona Board will be made in the not distant future.
The membership of the New Mexico Board is as follows:

    Hon. William C. McDonald, Santa Fe, _President_.
    Hon. Richard H. Hanna, Santa Fe.
    Mr. Nathan Jaffa, Roswell.
    Mr. John R. Joyce, Carlsbad.
    Mr. H. S. Kaune, Santa Fe.
    Mr. Owen N. Marron, Albuquerque.
    Mr. W. D. Murray, Silver City.

A decision has not as yet been made as to which of the above-named
members will be appointed Treasurer of the Board, but no time will be
lost in putting the Board into workable shape.

The past election brought changes in the gubernatorial chairs of
twenty-three of the States in which the American Red Cross has State
Boards. Men elected to such important positions in the governments of
the various States must find little time at the beginning for matters
other than those pertaining strictly to their new offices, yet out of the
twenty-three new Governors fifteen have already accepted the Presidency
of the Boards in their respective States. That the Red Cross can make
this announcement gives it great satisfaction, and it feels confident
that the remaining eight new Governors will also accept the leadership of
their State Boards as soon as the first rush of their new administration
is over.

During the past year the State Boards of Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Louisiana and Mississippi again demonstrated, during the relief work
incident to the Mississippi flood, as did that of West Virginia in
connection with the flood in the Northwestern part of that State, the
value of the plan adopted by the Red Cross and which comprehends in each
State a group of successful business and professional men to act as its
financial representatives and advisers in connection with disaster relief
work.


THE RED CROSS IN BALTIMORE

On another page will be found a brief account of the recent great
dynamite explosion in Baltimore with the relief measures which followed.
The incident offers an excellent illustration of the adaptability of Red
Cross methods and of the fact that the organization, though national
in scope and policy, is none-the-less local in its relations and an
integral part of the community in which its service is needed. When a
disaster is of such magnitude or character that local agencies of relief
are prostrated or overwhelmed, the Red Cross is prepared to provide the
necessary machinery for relief distribution; in smaller disasters the Red
Cross simply joins hands with other local agencies and lends its strength
and influence to concentration of resources and cooperative effort.

In time it is hoped that at least in our larger cities and towns there
will exist Red Cross Chapters in affiliation with all the local agencies
that can be utilized in case of disaster, so that relief work at such
times will all become Red Cross work.


THE RED CROSS BUILDING

In the RED CROSS MAGAZINE for January, 1913, appeared an illustration
of the beautiful building which the Red Cross hoped to obtain through
the combined generosity of the New York Commandery of the Loyal Legion
and the Congress of the United States. The proposed building was to be
a memorial to the loyal women of the Civil War and was to become the
permanent headquarters of the American Red Cross.

The Loyal Legion offered to donate $300,000 toward the memorial on
condition that Congress would give a suitable site in the City of
Washington. A bill was accordingly introduced in Congress to carry the
plan into effect by appropriating $300,000 for the purchase of ground.
Everybody was favorable and all conditions seemed auspicious.

Those who have had opportunities to observe legislation in the making,
are familiar with the fact that the only certain thing about it is its
uncertainty. A resume of the career of this particular measure affords
a shining example in point. The bill was introduced in both Senate and
House in the spring of 1912, and was referred to committees in the usual
manner. The Senate committee gave prompt consideration to the bill, and
of its own accord increased the amount of the proposed appropriation
to $400,000, after which it reported it to the Senate, which passed it
without opposition. The Committee on Public Buildings and Grounds of the
House, after hearings, submitted a unanimously favorable report to the
House on the last day before adjournment for the summer of 1912.

When Congress met in December, 1912, the status of the Red Cross
building bill seemed most fortunate. It had passed the Senate without
opposition carrying an appropriation of $400,000. The House Committee
had unanimously accepted the Senate bill and had recommended it for
passage. All that remained was for the House to pass it and the President
to attach his signature. The road looked straight and easy and not very
long, with a bright blue sky overhead.

And then something interfered slightly with the forward movement. Many
other bills with many active congressmen behind them crowded into the
foreground. There seemed to be no opening for the Red Cross bill to slip
through. Big bills for the support of the vast governmental departments
had to be given precedence. Time flew and congressmen began to refer
to the fact that it was a short session with much to be done. Also the
leaders began to urge economy in appropriations.

It was found impossible to get a definite place or date set for a vote on
the Red Cross bill. At one time it was proposed to try to call it up by
unanimous consent, but nothing came of that. Then those in charge thought
better to abandon it as a distinct measure and insert it as an item in
the big Public Buildings and Grounds Bill, which contained appropriations
for many buildings. Later the cry of economy became more strident and the
plan for the Red Cross bill was again changed. Now it was decided not to
bring it forward in the House but instead to pass the Public Buildings
and Grounds Bill in the House without it and let it be inserted by the
Senate when the big bill reached that body.

It is customary for the Senate to add numerous items to bills of this
character after the House has passed them. Then the bills as amended
by the Senate must go back to the House for the House to accept the
Senate amendments. If the House declines to accept the Senate amendments
a committee is appointed from each side to confer and try to agree
on the items in dispute. Usually both Senate and House accept the
recommendations of the conference committees.

So the House passed the Public Buildings and Grounds Bill without the
Red Cross item and the Senate was asked to insert that item. It did so.
Then opposition arose because the Red Cross building was a memorial to
the _loyal_ women of the Civil War. It was argued that the Confederate
women were just as brave and devoted and self-sacrificing as the women
of the North; that no memorial should perpetuate sectional feeling.
The proposition was made that the word _loyal_ be eliminated and that
the building be a memorial to _all_ the women of the Civil War. This
could not be done, however, because the gift of $300,000 by the Loyal
Legion was conditioned upon the retention of the word _loyal_. A sharp
discussion followed with the result that the Red Cross item was entirely
stricken out. A little later the subject was reopened and the Red Cross
item was again inserted and remained there when the Senate passed the
bill.

The House refused to accept the Senate amendments and a conference
committee was appointed. Several important Senate amendments, among them
the Red Cross item, became the subject of prolonged discussion. Congress
must adjourn on March 4th. It was now March 3rd and it became imperative
that an agreement should be reached. Finally the dispute had narrowed
down to this:

The House conferees would consent to the passage of the Red Cross item
if the Senate would abandon the item for the purchase of the Rock Creek
Valley in Washington for park purposes. The Rock Creek Valley purchase
was of the utmost importance to Washington. It had been urged for years
and there was no question that it was of greater public value at this
time than the provision of a Red Cross building. The Senate forced to
this hard choice wisely held on to the Rock Creek Valley item and the Red
Cross item was lost.

Perhaps this story of high hope, of keen suspense, of alternating
optimism and despair is not worth the space here given to its relation.
It is, however, a tale of a gallant fight in which the Red Cross won many
friends and made no enemies. Shall it fare better in Congress another
year? Who so faint hearted as to doubt?




Vivid Glimpses of the American Red Cross in Turkey


_Following are several illuminating extracts from reports recently
received from the fields of Red Cross activity in Turkey. The American
Red Cross has been extremely fortunate in the character of its
representation in this work. Some of those whose services have been
particularly noteworthy are mentioned in the statement below by Mr. G.
Bie Ravndal, American Consul General at Constantinople, who is also
secretary of the Red Cross Chapter in Constantinople. The composite
picture of widely extended and many-sided activity presented by these
brief reports conveys an impression of magnitude and importance which
must gratify every American who takes pride in the achievements of his
fellow countrymen._—EDITOR RED CROSS MAGAZINE.


FIGHTING THE CHOLERA AT SAN STEFANO

BY G. BIE RAVNDAL, _American Consul General, Secretary Red Cross Chapter._

Our Chapter was just withdrawing from the earthquake stricken coast
of the sea of Marmora, where, owing to the generosity of charitable
Americans, acting through the American National Red Cross, it had been
enabled to furnish medical and other timely aid, as described in my
report of October, 1912, when the wardogs were let loose in the Balkans,
and then began the initial scenes of that terrible drama which, during
the winter, has monopolized the attention of the world.

Hardly had the curtain fallen after the first battles, which followed
each other in swift, unrelenting succession, before the cholera began its
fearful ravages, competing with the shrapnel in deadly work.

Thousands of families, mostly women, children and old men, fled before
the onrush of soldiers from the north. Their suffering on the trail
baffles all description.

No feature of the catastrophe proved more heartrending than the condition
of affairs in the San-Stefano cholera camp, in which masses of sick
and wounded soldiers were thrown together after the battles of Louleh
Bourgas and Wisa. It is gratifying to be able to report the fact that it
was Hoffman Philip, secretary of the American Embassy in Constantinople;
Major Clyde Sinclair Ford, of the Medical Corps of the United States
Army, and Frederick Moore, of the Associated Press, who taking their
lives in their hands, first undertook the heroic work of organizing
relief in this place of horror. They were nobly assisted by Reverend
Dr. Frew, of the Scotch Mission in Constantinople, by two Swiss ladies,
residents of San-Stefano, Miss Alt and Mrs. Schneider, and also by Hon.
Maurice Baring, of London. The details of the relief furnished by our
Chapter in the San-Stefano cholera camp have been described in letters by
Mrs. W. W. Rockhill, wife of the American Ambassador at Constantinople,
and I shall not attempt to add to the information submitted by her, as
at the time under report I was in the United States. Mrs. Rockhill has
taken a leading part in the relief work instituted by the Constantinople
Chapter in the present emergencies, and the Chapter is deeply grateful to
her. Ultimately the San-Stefano situation was taken in hand by the Red
Crescent.

[Illustration: COMMITTEE OF NICHAUTACHE (SULTAN’S) HOSPITAL.]

[Illustration: EGYPTIAN RED CRESCENT MISSION UNDER DR. MAX REICH.]

Even before the San-Stefano need had been discovered by Mr. Hoffman
Philip, whose action in this relation cannot be too highly praised, the
Constantinople Chapter had established two Red Cross wards for wounded
soldiers in the barracks at Tash-Kesla in Constantinople, and a fully
equipped operating room. This hospital work has been, and is still
being, conducted by Major Ford. Major Ford came here while on leave
and generously offered his services to the Constantinople Chapter. His
professional skill and administrative experience have enabled the Chapter
to render invaluable help, which otherwise could not have been furnished
by us, in saving lives and alleviating suffering. Major Ford has been
ably assisted by D. Alton Davis, secretary of the International Y. M. C.
A. in Constantinople; Dr. Walton, surgeon of _U. S. S. Scorpion_, and Dr.
Kazakos, a graduate of Robert College.

Since Christmas the Chapter has been giving special attention to the
“refugees.”

Dr. Wilfred Mellvaine Post, of the American Medical Mission in Konia,
magnanimously volunteered to superintend the Chapter’s efforts in the
field for the relief of refugees. Associated with him is Miss Jeannie
Jillson, of the American School for Girls in Broussa.

Next to Broussa, as far as the Chapter’s present activities in behalf of
the refugees are concerned, comes Salonica. Our relief work is also being
extended into Monastir and Koricha in Albania.


SITUATION IN SALONICA

_Letter from Mr. E. O. Jacob._

                                                   Salonica, Jan. 3, 1913.

I trust you will forgive me for not writing you earlier. My trip
unfortunately lasted 13 days. I had 5 days’ quarantine in Pireus and
then had to wait 5 days for a steamer, so that I did not reach here till
December 30. I found, as I had feared, that the most urgent need was
over, and the work of relief in Salonica itself was already pretty well
organized. It seems, however, that my services will meet a real need at
least for some weeks. Some one is urgently needed to visit the towns and
villages of the provinces and Mr. Haskell is certainly the best man for
that.

I am writing this letter also as a sort of report, any material of which
you are at liberty to use. You have already received, I understand, a
copy of the “Independent,” describing the work of the “Societe de Secours
aux Refugies.” This is a quite modest and impersonal description of
the work of Mr. Haskell, Mme. Christo Hajji Lazaro and the association
whom they have gathered, namely, Pastor Brunau, Mme. Yenny, the wife
of a Swiss merchant; Sister Augustine of the Catholic Mission, and
lately Mr. van Bommel. They began at once the collection of funds, the
investigation of the condition of the refugees and the giving of bread.
It must have been a terrible task to locate 50,000 refugees, scattered
as they were all over the city, and still more so to inaugurate a system
of distribution, for the imams of mosques and the former Mouhtars of
different districts tried in every way to turn the funds into their
own pockets. But by frequent and tiresome inspections a fair degree of
efficiency is now maintained. The committee has now the aid of three
native pastors, who are proving very effective in tracing irregularities,
removals and other changes.

[Illustration: HOSPITAL IN CONSTANTINOPLE IN CHARGE OF GERMAN OFFICERS.]

[Illustration: TASH-KESHLA HOSPITAL, CONSTANTINOPLE.

FRONT ROW (BEGINNING FIFTH FROM LEFT)—MAJOR FORD C. S. A.; TURKISH
DOCTOR; MADAME DEPAGE IN NURSING COSTUME; UNKNOWN LADY; MARCHIONESS
PALLAVACINI, WIFE OF AUSTRIAN AMBASSADOR; MRS ROCKHILL, WIFE OF AMERICAN
AMBASSADOR; DR. DEPAGE.]

This group of people has thus far had to confine its activities to
the giving of bread, the most immediate necessity of the unfortunate
“muhajjirs.” For a long time they gave at the rate of 9 ounces per person
per day, surely a minimum ration. Since this week it has fortunately been
possible to raise the rate to 12 ounces a day. Four distribution centers
are operated, the people coming to these places for their allowances. At
the one where I am working we are now distributing 2,700 loaves a day.
The total daily distribution is 8,000 loaves and costs a little over 100
Lt. a day.

In certain directions the financial support has been very encouraging.
The largest giver, unofficial, of course, is the Greek government, which
has put into the hands of this society about 180,000 francs. Queen Olga
has in addition given the good sum of 40,000 francs out of her own purse.
From Holland came, as the result of an unsolicited appeal from the Dutch
Red Cross Mission here, 25,000 francs. The American Red Cross is credited
with about Lt. 350 and about 7,300 francs have come to Mr. Haskell from
friends in Switzerland. So up to the present the work has been maintained
without a deficit.

It seems clear, however, that as the harder part of the winter comes, aid
will, in many instances, have to be given in other ways than the one I
have mentioned, as 12 ounces of bread a day will not indefinitely keep
the body and soul together. Thus far, in fact, most of those who have
received aid have enough money for a little salt and a few olives, for a
few candles and a bit of charcoal. But lately we get the complaint more
and more frequently that these resources are exhausted and that the bread
ration no longer suffices alone. Once in two weeks, in fact, each person
gets a half bowl of soup. This is made possible by a very efficient
little soup kitchen which the Catholic sisters have opened. But this,
too, is certainly only a trifle. Again, as wintry weather comes, we get
calls for clothing, bed quilts, etc. Practically nothing has yet been
given in this line.

I have thus far been speaking exclusively of the people under the care
of the “Societe de Secours.” There is also in the city an “International
Committee,” which has been taking up other sides of the same work. It
has, for example, in operation an observation camp for those who have
been exposed to smallpox. It also charters steamers to convey to Asia
Minor free of charge those who wish to seek employment there. I had a
long interview with Mr. Forbes in Smyrna and brought to the committee
details about his offer to employ several thousand men in licorice
digging. They are therefore now sending him a first load of 1,100 persons
by the steamship _Assouan_. It strikes us all that to give them like this
an opportunity for steady work is about the best service that can be
rendered. The largest enterprise of this committee is the maintenance of
a concentration camp, which houses 6,000 refugees. Though they have to
live in tents they are otherwise under the best of care. The government
is military, the sanitary conditions are excellent and everyone directly
under the eye of the workers. Unfortunately the operating cost of
this camp (about Lt. 80 a day) is so great that the scheme cannot be
extended to the others. This committee, moreover, finds itself in a less
encouraging financial condition than the “Societe,” and with a deficit
already on hand, is not venturing beyond its present range of work.

Then, finally, the needs of the towns in the provinces are begging to
be brought to our attention. In many respects they are more sadly in
want than Salonica itself. Naturally the armies have absorbed all the
available foodstuffs. Moreover, dozens of villages have been burned to
the ground and many towns have been quite thoroughly looted. The same
sort of story comes from all the surrounding regions, Monastir, Uskub,
Strumitza, Brama, etc.

The British Balkan Committee has begun to help in several places. Mrs.
Lazaro has gone with a member of the Macedonian Relief Committee to
Gumendje, and Mr. Haskell expects to start next week on a two weeks’ tour
in the region of Strumitza. Those trips should make clear just what the
most urgent needs are.


RED CROSS WORK FOR REFUGEES IN WESTERN ASIA MINOR

_Part of a letter from Dr. Wilfred M. Post._

The number of refugees who have passed over from European Turkey into
Western Asia Minor since the commencement of the Balkan War is probably
in the neighborhood of 56,000; the large majority of these have settled
in the Broussa vilayet, a smaller number having found their way to the
Konia and Angora vilayets. Most of the refugees have traveled by rail,
their carts and oxen having been carried with them at the expense of the
government, but a fair proportion have “trekked” into the interior all
the way from European Turkey, spending several weeks on the journey.
The main distribution is along the line of the Anatolian railway, the
usual plan having been for a definite number to be allotted to each city
or large town along the line, and then sent off as fast as possible to
the villages—a few families to each village—the government hoping by
this arrangement to cause the refugees to amalgamate with the Anatolian
population, and also by allotting a few families to each village, to
throw the burden of maintenance on the people and avoid the problems
arising from concentration in large camps and settlements. This policy
has been carried out most thoroughly and the many hundreds of villages
from one or two hours to two or three days distance from the railway have
almost all received their quota of unfortunates to care for, an exception
having been made for the Christian villages, few, if any, of the latter
having been thus called upon.

About a quarter or a third of the refugees have come with some personal
clothing and bedding, and with some property in the shape of carts and
oxen, cooking utensils and money. These have been allowed to shift for
themselves, but the remainder have arrived in the interior in more or
less wretched condition, having little or nothing but the clothes they
wear, and in many cases only half-clad and in very poor condition to
meet the rigors of the cold Anatolian winter. As long as this class of
refugees remains in cities the government makes regular distributions of
bread to them, about 50 paras’ worth to each adult, and 25 paras to each
child per day, in some cases giving the money instead of the food, but as
soon as the refugees have been shipped off to the villages the government
ceases to distribute help.

[Illustration: HARBIE HOSPITAL.

ESTABLISHED BY DUTCH RED CROSS MISSION UNDER DR. LINGHEEK.]

Those refugees remaining in the cities have also been scattered as
extensively as possible, a notable instance being Konia, where 2,500
people have been scattered all over the city and surrounding gardens, a
few dozen having been put into each “mahle” or quarter of the city, so
that it took a week of careful search and inquiry to obtain statistics
that were anywhere near accurate. This extensive scattering makes the
work of relief very difficult; nevertheless much has been accomplished
already and by systematic canvassing by American missionaries and native
agents it is hoped that much of the suffering and need of the refugees
will be discovered and relieved. Relief of over-crowding, supply of
adequate clothing and bedding, opening of soup kitchens and supply of
food other than the dry bread given by the government, distribution
of fuel and medical aid, indicate the principal lines along which the
Red Cross must work for the next two or three months. The officials
everywhere express the hope that they will be able to send the refugees
back to Europe for the spring, but, of course, nothing definite can be
planned as yet. Whatever may be the political outcome of the Balkan war,
a large number of the refugees will undoubtedly remain in Anatolia, and
the Red Cross may then consider the advisability of providing employment
for these people, supplying them with farm implements, etc. The large
majority of the refugees are women and children, many of these having
been rendered widows and orphans by the war; the few able-bodied men who
have come have for the most part, been drafted into the Turkish army
and sent to Chatalja, so that the question of employment will have to
be considered later on. A few of the refugees are able to earn money by
carting wood and grain, using their primitive oxcarts for the purpose,
but most of them are idle, and on account of the great scattering
throughout the country they must, unfortunately, remain so for some time
to come. It is most fortunate that the general health of the refugees is
good, and from the hygienic standpoint the policy of scattering has no
doubt been a good one. There are, of course, many cases of sickness among
them, and in the process of investigation we have found many people at
the point of death from exposure and cold, the most pathetic cases being
among the children. Here again the scattering makes it impossible to do
much visiting, and though the communities may be saved from epidemic,
many individuals, sad to say, will perish from cold, hunger and disease
this winter.

[Illustration: MACEDONIAN REFUGEES FLEEING TO CONSTANTINOPLE.]

Our investigations have been confined chiefly to the cities, where
several hundreds or thousands of refugees are gathered, but we have also
looked into the condition of a dozen or more villages and have found
that in general the villagers have been kind to the refugees and have
given them food and shelter, and have lent them clothing and bedding;
but in some places the villagers have thrust the refugees into stables
and broken-down hovels, with little or no clothing and bedding, and
just enough food to keep body and soul together. In some instances
the unfortunate, defenceless women and girls have been forced into
prostitution.

The Constantinople Chapter of the American Red Cross has established
relief work in Konia and Broussa along the lines indicated above. In
Konia a systematic canvass of the city and surrounding villages has been
made, and bedding and clothing distributed according to need; in many
cases eight or ten people were found sharing one quilt, and women and
children walking about the frozen streets with bare feet. For people in
the city we distributed tickets having the articles they were to receive
indicated on them, and the distribution was made on the mission premises.
The government, however, forbade us to carry on independent work and
insisted that all articles for distribution must be handed over to them;
we were unwilling to accept this condition, so work was stopped for the
time being. In Broussa an effort has been made to get the people into
more sanitary quarters than they now occupy; we found many places where
eight, ten and even twelve people were packed into a tiny mud-floored
room about ten feet square, damp and dismal, and with one or two of
the family sick—in one case three people, one with ulcers and two with
dysentery, reposing under one small and filthy quilt. Not only must these
people be gotten speedily into more healthy surroundings, but some sort
of sanitary supervision must be established over the quarters to which
they are to be removed. It is our expectation to open one or more soup
kitchens and inaugurate some medical work.

We have turned over the city of Eski-Shehir to the Germans, who promise
to attend to its needs and to those of the surrounding region. We hope
through the above arrangements to get into direct touch with more than
half the refugees in Asia Minor, and trust that where our work is unable
to reach them other helpers may come forward to tide them over this first
difficult winter.


ACTIVITIES OF THE RED CRESCENT SOCIETY

The Turkish Red Crescent Society has come forward so nobly during the
present war that it has delighted observers by the depth and force of
its vitality. A national institution of humanitarian aims, it had been
recognized as such in the Geneva Conference of 1864—but though it had
worked efficiently in the Russian and Turco-Greek wars of the last
century, it is only lately, through the impulsion given to it some
years ago by Mrs. Rifaat Pasha, wife of the present Turkish Ambassador
in Paris, that its more modern organization and increased capital have
brought it to the front, able to compete in usefulness and resource with
the Red Cross Societies in other countries.

The society is managed by a Central Committee, composed of 30 members,
subject to the approval of a president and to the occasional control of
the government. At present His Excellency Hussein Hilmi Pasha, Ottoman
Ambassador in Vienna, is president of the Red Crescent.

At the beginning of the Turco-Balkan war the Red Crescent Committee
founded three hospitals for the wounded—one numbering over 600 beds—in
the capital of the Empire, and several in the provinces, notably
at Salonica, Adrianople, Uskub, Loule-Bourgas, etc., appointing
well-equipped staffs of nurses and doctors. The necessary surgical
instruments and medical supplies were procured from abroad, and recently
ambulances were ordered from South Bend, Indiana. Four transportable
hospitals of 100 beds each were received from England, and following
the example set by European nations in such cases, the Red Crescent
established field kitchens in the principal camps, which supplied the
harrassed soldiers with soup and bread.

When the cholera broke out among the hapless troops, and they were sent
back to Constantinople for treatment, the society organized three more
new hospitals in the choleraic centers of Hademkeny, San-Stefano, etc.,
and as the sick soon filled to overflowing the epidemic wards hastily
founded in the capital, the Red Crescent had the mosques of the city
opened to the sufferers and supplied them with food, linen and medical
care. It is computed that about 3,000 soldiers were supported in these
improvised hospitals between the beginning of October and the end of
November, 1912, and in this heavy task the Red Crescent was assisted by
its branch missions of Hindoustan, Egypt and England, who took their full
share of the heavy nursing and relief work. Besides the hospitals thus
run, the Red Crescent sent Lt. 7500 in cash to the military sanitary
authorities of Constantinople, as well as very numerous suits of
clothing, articles of bedding and medicinal supplies.

The arrival of the refugees in Constantinople created a new and
tremendous demand for aid. The Red Crescent immediately forwarded another
Lt. 7500 to the prefecture of the town, and housed thousands of the
unfortunate emigrants in old Konaks (palaces) and in temporary sheds.
Committees of investigation and distribution were organized in the chief
provincial centers to which the government sent the refugees and bread or
money doled out.

The Ladies’ Section of the Red Crescent Society has proved most active
on behalf of the patients and refugees. Societies were formed for the
cutting and sewing of linen, of which the hospitals were continually in
need, and the garments made reached the total of 70,000.

The foregoing facts (culled from the columns of the _Jeune Turc_), brief
and incomplete as they are, suffice to show, however, that the energies
of the Red Crescent Society have been severely taxed during the present
terrible happenings, and it is an act of justice as well as one of keen
satisfaction to say that these energies have been not drained but richly
developed by the call made upon them.

In the present emergency the Red Crescent has been generously supported
by the Red Cross Societies of different countries. Sisters of the
Red Cross and the Red Crescent have worked shoulder to shoulder in
alleviating suffering, as shown by the photograph herewith inclosed of
the Imperial Hospital in Nichantache, Constantinople, kindly furnished by
the Phebus Atelier.


SAVAGES FOUR HUNDRED YEARS AGO

Writing from Konia, January 15, Dr. Dodd sends in the following about an
old Moslem priest:

“An old Turkish hodja named Saduk Effendi called today and said he came
for the special purpose of asking me to give his thanks to the people
in America who are sending help to the poor here. I report his words as
near as I can do so. ‘May the Lord of the Universe, the God of all men,
who are all of one family on this earth, look graciously upon those who
have shown such love and kindness. The servants of God here will always
remember and rejoice in these good deeds. How wonderful that a people
that were only savages four hundred years ago should have awakened to
such noble deeds! When shall we have such an awakening?’”

[Illustration: AMERICAN RED CROSS WORK IN BROUSSA.

REFUGEES WAITING OUTSIDE THE PROTESTANT SCHOOL WHERE CLOTHING AND BEDDING
ARE DISTRIBUTED. A CLINIC IS HELD EVERY AFTERNOON IN THIS BUILDING AND
PATIENTS OBTAIN THEIR MEDICINES FREE OF COST FROM THE DRUG STORE AROUND
THE CORNER.]

[Illustration: WOMEN AND CHILDREN REFUGEES IN THE COURT OF THE PROTESTANT
SCHOOL IN BROUSSA.

DISTRIBUTION IS MADE FROM THE ROOM AT THE LEFT. TEA IS BEING SERVED WHILE
THE PEOPLE ARE WAITING. SEVERAL OF THE WOMEN ARE SEEN COVERING THEIR
FACES OR TURNING THEIR BACKS TO THE CAMERA, BUT THE MAJORITY MAKE NO
OBJECTION TO HAVING THEIR PICTURES TAKEN.]


FAIK PASHA DELLA-SUDDA

One of the prominent Constantinople personalities, Faik Pasha
Della-Sudda, died on Jan. 11, 1913. He was the founder and honorary
president of the Red Crescent Society, which during many difficult years
owed its subsistence to his devoted management, and the AMERICAN RED
CROSS MAGAZINE is indebted to his courtesy for the interesting article on
the Red Crescent, published in Vol. 5, No. 3. of 1910.

Born in 1835, Faik Pasha Della-Sudda was sent when scarcely sixteen to
France, where he studied under the famous chemist, Ganot. He completed
his training at the Superior School of Pharmacy, Paris, and at the
laboratory of Wurtz & Gerhard, and on his return to Constantinople was
immediately appointed to the post of professor of chemistry at the
Imperial University of Medicine in that city. For nearly half a century
he personally conducted most of the pharmaceutics and chemistry classes
in the capital of the Ottoman Empire, with a range and depth of knowledge
that has been universally recognized and appreciated.

His important treatises on ammonium, phosphoric acid, opium and the
falsification of pharmaceutical products in Turkey, his contributions
to European and American exhibitions, made his name well-known abroad,
and in 1910 he was unanimously elected honorary president of the
newly-organized “Society of Pharmacists in Turkey,” in proof of the
grateful affection of colleagues and pupils, and of his own superior
scholarship and value. He leaves behind him the record of a long life
admirably spent.

[Illustration]




Red Cross and White Cross in Mexico

ERNEST P. BICKNELL, _National Director American Red Cross_.


During the culminating scenes of the recent revolution in Mexico, when
the capital city was torn by heavy artillery warfare in its central
streets and plazas, and which resulted in the tragic death of President
Francisco I. Madero, the press dispatches referred occasionally to
the activities of the Mexican Red Cross and the Mexican White Cross.
These dispatches were of a character to sadden the friends of the Red
Cross movement, because they indicated a failure on the part of the
federal troops to respect the Red Cross flag and because they revealed a
defection of some who should have been a part of the Red Cross, but who,
instead, divided the strength and prestige of humane Mexico by organizing
the White Cross Society, whose functions are identical with those of the
Red Cross.

It is reported that while engaged in giving attention to wounded men in
the plaza before the National Palace, the president of the Red Cross was
shot and killed. It has also been stated that two members of the White
Cross Society were captured by the troops under the command of General
Diaz and were found to be engaged in carrying ammunition, and that for
this reason they were executed. Without more complete knowledge of local
conditions and in consideration of the terrible confusion which prevailed
in the City of Mexico in those days of fighting, it would be unjust to
endeavor to fix the blame for these unfortunate incidents.

With the establishment of a stable government and the coming of peace it
is hoped that the Mexican Red Cross may be given its proper status and
recognition, and that those who have heretofore served under the banner
of the White Cross may be induced to dissolve that organization and join
hands heartily with the Red Cross.

The origin of the Mexican White Cross dates back to the revolution
which Francisco I. Madero led against the government of Porfirio Diaz.
As a result of the severe fighting between the insurgent and federal
forces along the United States border in the spring of 1911 many men
were seriously injured. At that time no systematic medical service was
provided by either army, and the Mexican Red Cross, which had been
organized only a short time previously, had not undertaken to send nurses
and physicians to the front. The situation at the threshold of the United
States, particularly at the California boundary and near El Paso, Texas,
became so serious that the American Red Cross undertook to provide
physicians, nurses and hospital care for such of the wounded men as could
be reached without going into the interior of Mexico. This service of
the American Red Cross along the border in California, Texas, New Mexico
and Arizona aroused a sense of pride among many of the people of Mexico,
with the result that a group of friends of the insurgents organized a
body of nurses and physicians to be sent to the scene of the fighting.
To the new organization was given the name of the Mexican White Cross.
At about the same time that the White Cross was organized, the Red Cross
also prepared to send nurses and physicians to the front. The White Cross
group reached Juarez, across the boundary from El Paso, only twenty-four
hours before the arrival of the Red Cross group. At that time it was a
matter of current report that the White Cross promoters and supporters
were favorable to Madero and his cause, and that the Red Cross, having
been created under the administration of President Diaz, inclined to
favor the federal cause as against that of Madero. The representatives
of the two organizations on reaching Juarez were not cordial to each
other, and a strong feeling of rivalry was apparent. In justice to both
organizations, however, it should be said that at a conference held in
Juarez at the suggestion of representatives of the American Red Cross, an
arrangement was made by which the work to be done was divided equitably
between the two, and that thereafter they worked side by side, zealously
and seemingly without friction.

[Illustration: MEXICO CITY. LOOKING NORTH FROM CATHEDRAL TOWER.

© Underwood & Underwood]

[Illustration: MARKET SQUARE, MEXICO “THE SOLDIERS ARE COMING.”

© Underwood and Underwood]

While the facts are not known, it is possible that the failure of the
Madero troops, in the recent fighting in the City of Mexico, to respect
the Red Cross flag in some measure resulted from the reported partiality
of the Red Cross for the Diaz government when Madero was the leader
of the insurgents. On the other hand, General Diaz, in the recent
Mexican fighting, may have been the more ready to deal harshly with the
representatives of the White Cross because of the fact that the White
Cross had been reported to be particularly friendly to the cause of
Madero when Madero was fighting President Diaz, uncle to General Diaz,
leader of the uprising which overthrew Madero.

But whatever may have been the causes which led to a division of the
humane people of Mexico into the camps of the Red Cross and the White
Cross, it is not to be forgotten that their objects were humanitarian
and at bottom identical. With the coming of peace and the restoration
of normal conditions of life in the Republic of Mexico, there is every
reason to hope that rivalries may be forgotten and that there may come a
splendid union of all the humanitarian forces of the country under the
emblem of the Red Cross.

In the closing days of the Madero government, while fierce and ruthless
war raged in the streets of the City of Mexico, lives and property of
American residents were in extreme peril. United States Ambassador Henry
Lane Wilson gave every possible assistance and protection, but at best
many were without resources and were unable to escape from the city or
country unaided. The American Red Cross, on receiving information of
these conditions through the Department of State, forwarded $1,000 to
Ambassador Wilson to be expended at his discretion for the benefit of
Americans in need. Many Americans who succeeded in reaching the city of
Vera Cruz were unable to pay for steamship passage to the United States,
and for their assistance the Red Cross also sent $500 to William W.
Canada, American Consul General of that city, to be used as required for
their help.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: PLAZA IN FRONT OF NATIONAL PALACE, MEXICO CITY. PRESIDENT
MADERO ADDRESSING THE CROWD FROM BALCONY.

© Underwood & Underwood]

[Illustration: REMOVING THE DEAD FROM THE STREETS OF MEXICO CITY.

© Underwood & Underwood]




Dynamite Explosion at Baltimore


A tramp steamer, the _Alum Chine_, lay peacefully at her dock in
Baltimore Harbor on March 6, while a gang of stevedores loaded her with
dynamite for use in the Panama Canal. The boxes of the explosive were
being transferred to the hold of the ship from cars which stood on a
barge alongside. About 300 tons of dynamite were on board or in the cars
when smoke was seen coming from below. Knowing the inevitable result the
men leaped overboard with a rush but before all had reached safety the
explosion came.

No words can convey any adequate conception of the terrific destructive
power of such a sudden loosing of immeasurable force. The _Alum Chine_
and the barge with its cars alongside disappeared. Other vessels in the
vicinity were shattered. Men upon the deck of a new ship five hundred
feet away were swept down like tall grass in a gale and a rain of
fragments of iron and wreckage killed some, injured many and pierced the
steel hull like shots from a cannon. Houses miles away were rocked to
their foundations and windows were shattered without number.

[Illustration: REMARKABLE PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN AN INSTANT AFTER THE EXPLOSION
OF 300 TONS OF DYNAMITE WHICH HAD BEEN LOADED ON BOARD THE “ALUM CHINE”
FOR SHIPMENT TO THE CANAL ZONE.]

Immediate measures of relief were undertaken in behalf of the families
of the thirty-one men killed and the fifty-eight injured. The Baltimore
Chapter of the Red Cross held a meeting and appropriated $500 while the
newspapers were equally prompt in collecting funds. By common consent
the Federated Charities, with its experienced agents, was given charge
of the gathering of the information necessary to effective action as
well as of the actual relief distribution. The next logical step was
the consolidation of all contributed funds from whatever source. Thus
efficiency and community unity of action were assured from the start.
With this beginning it may be confidently expected that the greatest
possible good will result from the generosity of the Baltimore people.




Public Works and Relief in China


In general a report of relief operations published long after the
public interest in the emergency which called for relief has subsided,
is regarded as a good example of what not to read. When an exception
is found, it is entitled to special notice, which accounts for this
reference to the report of the Central China Famine Relief Committee,
embracing an account of the relief operations in the famine district in
China between October 1, 1911, and June 30, 1912. It will be recalled
that the headquarters of the committee were in Shanghai and membership
included many well known American and other foreign residents of China,
as well as prominent Chinese citizens. Bishop F. R. Graves was chairman
and Rev. E. C. Lobenstine, secretary, and Consul General Amos P. Wilder
an active member. These three gentlemen are Americans. At the outset of
its work the committee adopted a program stated in six articles. Two of
these articles were:

“That relief be given only in return for work done, except in the case of
those incapacitated for work.”

“That in the selection of work, preference be given to such work as will
help the locality permanently, and as tends to prevent the recurrence of
famine conditions, and that each piece be complete in itself.”

This program was closely adhered to from first to last. District
subcommittees of representative foreign and native residents, appointed
in various sections of the famine region, had immediate charge of the
relief works and distribution, and under the district committees were
superintendents who had personal direction of the working forces. So much
for the machinery. Now for the accomplishment.

In May, 1912, the number of famine sufferers in the employ of the relief
committee was 110,000. As but one member was employed from a family,
it is estimated that this work supported about 550,000 persons. The
character of the work undertaken and its extent are indicated by the
following figures from the report:

    Dykes built or repaired        129 miles
    Canals built or repaired        63 miles
    Ditches built or repaired    1,124 miles
    Roads repaired                 163 miles
    Cubic yards of earth moved    10,155,000

It was estimated that the average amount of work performed daily by a
famine sufferer was about two-thirds the average day’s work of a coolie
under normal conditions. In Hankow 2,000 women from the famine district
were employed for months in making garments, of which 64,000 were made
and distributed. Much space is given in the report to a description of
the actual methods of conducting the work on dykes, canals, etc. A single
extract must suffice here:

“Now come with me to the works. First in number and importance are the
dirt pushers (I translate the Chinese term), who dig the earth from
rectangular pits and push it on their wheelbarrows to the new dykes. They
number 3,400 and work in groups of about ten men each and are paid by the
job in this way. As soon as a pit reaches a depth of four or five feet
it is measured by the foreigner in charge and the head man of the ten
is given a ticket which is really an order on the office for the value
in grain of the work done. Measuring these pits takes almost all of one
foreigner’s time, and as two-thirds of the workmen are dirt pushers, the
foreigner has in his direct control that fraction of the whole. The dirt
pushers receive 450 cash per fang of 100 cubic feet. In this and the
following statement it should be remembered that it takes about 2,500
cash to make a gold dollar.

[Illustration: CHINESE ENGAGED IN BUILDING DYKES FOR THE PREVENTION OF
FLOODS IN THE FAMINE DISTRICTS.]

[Illustration: TAMPING EARTHWORK.]

“Next in numerical strength are the ‘small workmen,’ of whom we have
about 1,000. Their work is to carry water from the canal to the dyke in
order that the latter may be pounded firm the more easily. Also many of
them receive the earth as it comes on to the dyke, break it up, level it
and dig small holes into which the water may be poured. They are paid in
grain at the rate of 150 cash per man per day.

“Now we come to the pounders. They number 750 and were divided in groups
of ten. Each group has a stone weighing about 100 pounds, circular, a
foot in diameter, and eight inches thick. To each stone are attached ten
ropes, one for each of the ten men, and when the men all pull in unison
the stone rises above the level of their heads and then comes down with
a thud. The dyke is built in layers, which are one foot thick after they
are pounded. Each layer is pounded until it is of the consistency of
rubber and is then tested in this unique way. An iron rod is driven down
and into the small hole thus made water is poured from a tea kettle. If
the water does not soak away the layer has been pounded sufficiently.
These pounders are skilled workmen and were originally paid 250 cash
worth of grain per man per day, but they proved to be so lazy that we had
to invent a sliding scale of wages. So we considered 1,200 square feet as
a full day’s work, and if a gang pounds that amount each man is given 250
cash; if they pound 1,100 square feet, 240 cash; 1,000 square feet, 230
cash; 1,300 square feet, 260 cash, and so on. Now they are not lazy.

“We have thirty skilled workmen who trim the edges of the dyke and give
it a finished appearance. Also there are sixty overseers who understand
the work. They keep an eye on the stone men and test their work as
described above, see that the dirt pushers place the dirt in the proper
place and direct the stream of water carriers as they come. Both these
classes of workmen receive 250 cash worth of grain a day.”

In 1911 the American Red Cross sent to China Mr. C. D. Jameson, a well
known engineer, to study the conditions which cause the frequent great
floods to devise and suggest a system of river conservancy which will
reduce the number and extent of these floods. Mr. Jameson was an advisor
of the relief committee and was familiar with its public works at all
times. He praises in the warmest terms the thoroughness of the operations
and the judgment and ability of the missionaries who were in charge
of much of the work. These missionaries, in fact, proved themselves
practical men and capable administrators, who did not spare themselves,
but under adverse conditions gave from twelve to fifteen hours daily to
their unpaid tasks.

In connection with the relief operations an interesting experiment in
colonization was undertaken under the leadership of Prof. Joseph Bailie,
of the University of Nanking. After many difficulties Prof. Bailie, with
the co-operation of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, at that time Provisional President
of China, secured a tract of waste land at the foot of Purple Mountain,
near Nanking, moved some of his more trustworthy men on to it and began
its cultivation. Huts were first built. A school was started for the
children, so that they would be cared for while the men and women were at
work. The land was gradually broken up, drainage ditches were dug, and
potatoes and strawberries, wheat and other cereals were planted. A large
number of fruit trees were set out. Some of these were Chinese, but many
were obtained from Japan and other countries. The land is now being used
as an experiment farm and as a testing school for the men. The soil is of
a poor quality, and is in many ways unsatisfactory; but Prof. Bailie is
persevering in the faith that he will succeed, not only in doing a piece
of work which will be deeply interesting to the officials and gentry near
the city of Nanking, but will prove of value to the larger enterprise
which he still expects to see carried through.

Mr. Jameson, the American Red Cross conservancy engineer, after
traversing the famine districts, says of the prevention of the recurrent
floods which have caused many famines, including this one of 1911-12:

“There are no engineering difficulties in the way of controlling the
rivers, lowering the flood level and reclaiming the waste land in North
Kiangsu and North Anhwei; it is purely a question of money and time.
Under the present conditions at least three crops out of five are
lost over an area of some 30,000 square miles. The soil of this area
is exceedingly rich, the climate such that two crops a year should be
possible when the conservancy and reclamation work had been completed.
Not only will heavy crops be possible over this whole section year by
year, but some millions of acres (English), which now are absolutely
worthless, will be available for cultivation. All of this makes the
expenditure of the necessary money justifiable from a commercial
standpoint.”

It is hoped that the Republic of China will accept the plan prepared by
Mr. Jameson as a basis for a system of river conservancy which will put
an end to the greater part of the flood devastation which has cursed this
land for many centuries. Chinese records show that since the year 494 A.
D. sixty-seven famines have occurred in this region. All but two of these
famines were caused by floods.

The Central China Famine Relief Committee held its last meeting and
closed its work on January 21, 1913. At that time an unexpended balance
of approximately $75,000 (gold) remained in the treasury, but the
committee disposed of the greater part of it by a series of resolutions,
which were in effect as follows:

The sum of $11,250 was placed in the hands of a special committee for the
purpose of carrying on “a campaign covering three years or more, to draw
attention of officials and people to the seriousness of famines which
are occurring with such frequency in different parts of China; to educate
public opinion upon the subject of famine prevention and to show how the
condition of the people in the famine area can be permanently improved.”
The treasurer of this educational fund is the treasurer of the National
Committee of the Young Men’s Christian Association of China.

The sum of $2,500 was set aside to assist in the care of “famine
children” in the orphanages of the Catholic missions in the famine areas.

The sum of $5,500 was appropriated to be applied to the carrying out of a
plan already begun for colonizing destitute Chinese upon unoccupied lands
under instruction and supervision.

The sum of $22,500 was set aside to be used in the repair of dykes in the
neighborhood of Wuhu on condition that the Chinese of Anhwei Province
raise the sum of $45,000 to be applied to the same work.

The sum of $7,500 was voted to be used in the education of Chinese young
men in forestry, with special reference to conservation against drought
and flood. The purpose is to select a few especially promising Chinese
students from the institutions of higher education in China and send them
to the American School of Forestry at Manila, P. I., or possibly in some
instances to the United States. These young men, after receiving their
education, will be expected to return to their native country and enter
actively into efforts toward that reforestation which is regarded as
essential to any great reduction in the number and severity of floods and
droughts.

After making the allotments above mentioned there remained a balance
in the committee’s hands of about $22,500, which was transferred to a
permanent committee of trustees, consisting of the following: The General
Consular Officer of the United States at Shanghai, the Commissioner
of Customs, the Manager of the International Banking Corporation, the
Honorable Wu Ting Fang, Ch’on Jen Fu, Esq., and the Chairman of the
Chinese Chamber of Commerce. This committee will hold the balance of the
relief funds for use in future relief work which may be necessary in
China as the result of famines.

[A part of this article was published in a recent issue of the Survey.]

[Illustration: HOUSEBOAT USED BY MR. C. D. JAMESON, AMERICAN RED CROSS
CIVIL ENGINEER, EMPLOYED IN CHINA.]




Nicaraguan Famine Relief


A general failure of crops, followed by the revolutionary outbreak of
last summer in Nicaragua caused great distress among the poorer classes
in that country. Conditions were sufficiently bad before the military
operations took place, but during July, owing to the revolution, they
became critical, and many Nicaraguans faced starvation. Early in August,
having been apprised of the situation as it then existed, Secretary
of State Knox addressed a communication to the American Red Cross,
requesting to be informed whether the Red Cross was in a position to
furnish food supplies to relieve the needs of the non-combatants. The
American Red Cross promptly forwarded $1,000 to the American minister at
Panama, with instructions to expend that amount in the purchase of flour,
beans, corn, rice and potatoes. Through the courtesy and co-operation of
Colonel George W. Goethals, U. S. A., Governor of the Canal Zone, the
commissary of the Isthmian Canal Commission furnished these supplies
at wholesale rates, and the same were shipped via the United States
transport _Justin_, which was carrying a battalion of United States
Marines to Nicaragua.

On August 28th, at the request of Hon. George T. Weitzel, American
minister to Nicaragua, at Managua, the State Department suggested
a further appropriation by the American Red Cross to continue the
alleviation of the suffering which would probably continue some time
after the revolutionary disturbances. Pursuant to this suggestion, a
further appropriation of $1,000 was made by the Central Committee, and
the supply of corn and beans purchased therewith was shipped to Managua
from Panama on the steamer _San Juan_, on September 7th.

Under date of January 21, 1913, the Secretary of State transmitted to
the American Red Cross a report from Mr. Weitzel as to the manner in
which the supplies were distributed and the effectiveness of the relief
rendered. Following is an extract from that report:

“The first car, consisting of flour, corn, beans, rice and potatoes to
the value of one thousand dollars, left the Panama Canal Zone on August
9, 1912, in charge of Major Smedley D. Butler, U. S. M. C., and was
received in Managua on the 15th of that month.

“The legation requested a committee of Americans, including Messrs. Otto
Schoenrich, A. R. Thompson, C. D. Ham, A. J. Lindberg and J. A. Whitaker,
to take charge of the provisions under instructions to relieve all cases
of distress, irrespective of affiliation of the applicants; but as they
were unable to attend to the matter on account of departure from the
city, or other reason, the legation decided to do the work itself. Mr.
Walter H. Hooper, an American missionary, and Padre J. A. Lezcano, a well
known Nicaraguan priest, kindly offered to assist in investigating needy
cases. Signed tickets, good for five rations, were then issued to the
applicants who presented them to Mr. William Gower, assistant paymaster
of the United States Navy, at the railroad station, where two-fifths of
the car load was distributed, beginning with the flour and potatoes,
which deteriorate very rapidly in this climate.

“The remaining three-fifths were taken to Leon, where Lieutenant Colonel
Charles G. Long, U. S. M. C., distributed them through the Hospital San
Vincente and the Sisters of Charity, reserving a portion, however, to
feed one hundred and twenty-five prisoners, who had been sadly neglected
during the hostilities in that town.

“The second carload donated by the Red Cross consisted of 10,000 pounds
of beans and 7,140 pounds of cornmeal, these two staples being the
principal articles of food for the poorer classes in Nicaragua. Having
been despatched from the Canal Zone on September 7th the consignment
reached Managua on the 14th of that month and was started the next
morning to Granada under the personal charge of the clerk of the
legation, arriving there after being fired on at the Barranca on Sunday,
September 22d. The distribution was promptly begun from a central station
even before the disarmament had taken place. Great assistance was
rendered by Dr. Juan I. Urtecho, an elderly gentleman of wide reputation
for impartial charity, who has devoted many years of his professional
life as a physician to gratuitous practice among the poor, and who before
the arrival of the Americans had fed at his own expense hundreds of
famished people. Several of the Granada ladies kindly volunteered their
services in placing the tickets with deserving families, and Private
Baldwin, U. S. M. C., supplied the holders of the tickets with the number
of rations thereon designated, nearly 8,000 in all being thus disposed
of. A gratifying feature of the distribution of supplies was the small
number of men who appeared in line, and even those few were maimed, sick
or blind. The Red Cross and San Juan Hospitals, the French College for
Girls and the schools were given the first attention.

“There was urgent need of help, as many poor families had been forced
for a long time to subsist on green mangoes, and some deaths had already
resulted from starvation, but the timely arrival of supplies quickly
relieved the situation. Children who crowded around the camp were fed
by the enlisted men out of their own rations, and a carload of corn and
flour donated by the American colony in Managua was distributed among the
sufferers.

“As soon as order was restored the farmers from the surrounding territory
brought their produce to market, and the railroad resumed transportation
of supplies which had been accumulating in Corinto, so that conditions at
Granada and elsewhere should begin gradually to improve, although it will
be some time before the people will cease to feel the depression caused
by the failure of crops for two successive years, and by the hardships
suffered during the present disturbances.

“The prompt and generous action of the American Red Cross has won
expressions of deep appreciation from those who have been helped, and has
created the kindliest feeling among all classes of people in Nicaragua.”




Important Conference on Red Cross Christmas Seals


No sooner does one Red Cross Christmas Seal Campaign end than
preparations for the next begins. While the public sees and hears of the
seal only during the months of November and December, when the seals are
on sale, a very large amount of preparatory work is necessary in order
that the sale may reach every section of the country and may be carried
on with the publicity and system which are necessary to success.

Although the returns from the season of 1912 are not yet all received,
the first important step toward the Christmas Seal Campaign of 1913 has
already been taken. This was a conference held in the offices of the
American Red Cross in Washington on February 28th and attended by many
of the principal State and city agents, who have demonstrated their
ability in past years and will be leaders in the campaign of this year.
It is gratifying to note that with each succeeding year the system and
methods of selling Christmas Seals are improving. In the first year
or two after the introduction of the Seals as a means of obtaining
support for anti-tuberculosis work, the venture was generally regarded
as one of those novelties which, after a transient popularity, drop
quickly out of use. Agents thought it scarcely worth while to undertake
the trouble and expense of systematizing their methods of selling and
accounting. Gradually the permanent value of the Seal as a method of
interesting a very large number of people in anti-tuberculosis work and
in raising large sums of money without unjustly burdening any givers
began to be apparent. From that time the methods of distributing, selling
and accounting for the Seals have been made the subject of careful
study. System and business methods have been gradually introduced,
with the result that instead of falling away, the sales of Seals have
increased with each year, while economies which have been introduced in
administration have increased the percentage of net profit.

In the winter of 1912 the first conference was held of agents for the
Seals for the discussion and interchange of experiences and for the
purpose of reaching an agreement upon questions of interest to all. That
conference was so prolific of good results in the Seal campaign of 1912
that a second similar conference was held on February 28th, as above
mentioned.

An idea of the thoroughness with which the agents are considering the
business of distributing the Seals may be gained from a mention of a few
topics considered at this conference. The first subject of discussion was
the design for the Christmas Seal of 1913 and the form which the Seal
should take. It was the unanimous opinion of those present that the Seal
should contain some pictorial design suitable to the Christmas season,
rather than a purely ornamental design of artistic merit, but without any
particular human appeal. Without exception the agents reported that the
design for 1912, containing a head of Santa Claus, had proved the most
popular yet adopted.

Another subject discussed was the character, variety and quantity of
advertising matter to be prepared. It was reported that an experiment in
selling Seals through penny-in-the-slot machines had proved unsuccessful,
and this method of distribution was disapproved. From many agents it
was learned that the sale of Seals through a simple mail order system
had proved successful and inexpensive. In many busy offices agents for
the Seals find it difficult to obtain a hearing by personal calls, when
a brief, well-expressed letter will receive a prompt and favorable
response. In certain cities fully half the Seals sold in 1912 were
disposed of in this manner.

It was found to be the consensus of opinion among agents that the
offering of prizes for the sale of Seals, especially individual prizes
to school children, is inadvisable. A few agents reported the successful
use of prizes for schools, but not to individual pupils, without apparent
disadvantages. All agreed that great care must be exercised in offering
prizes in order to avoid stimulating children to improper methods.
Several agents reported that citizens of their communities had complained
of annoyance because of the numerous calls at their doors by children
desirous of selling Seals. One agent described a method of avoiding this
nuisance which has proved completely successful in his community. This
method is for a citizen who has purchased Christmas Seals to paste one of
the seals on his door knob or front door. Any child approaching a door
and seeing a seal thus posted, understands that he is not to disturb that
household, as its supply of Seals is already purchased. By announcing
this system of protection through the press and in the schools it is said
to have fully accomplished its purpose.

Tn Ohio the State agent for the Seals adopted a method of awarding
prizes which is reported to have been extremely successful, not only as
a stimulus to the selling of Seals, but as an educational factor. The
agent offered to supply a visiting nurse for one month to each of the
twelve cities in the State of Ohio which sold the largest percentage
of Seals in proportion to its population. A trained visiting nurse was
employed by the State agent for one year and was sent in turn from city
to city among the prize winners, serving one month in each locality. Not
only did this prove an extremely popular arrangement, but in six of the
cities benefited by the plan in 1912, the public became so impressed
by the value of the visiting nurse that they arranged to employ nurses
permanently upon the withdrawal of the prize nurse.

It has been found by experience that the distribution and sale of
Seals can best be carried on through the appointment of State agents,
who in turn appoint, and are responsible for, the local agents. The
State agents return to the American Red Cross 10 per cent of the gross
proceeds of sales in their respective States. This 10 per cent is to
cover the expense to the Red Cross, which manufactures and distributes
the Seals and the large quantity and variety of advertising matter used
by the agents. The conference discussed at length the question of the
percentage which the local agents should pay to the State agents. This
discussion resulted in the conclusion that it is impracticable to fix
upon a percentage applicable to all States alike. Local conditions vary
so widely in different States that a percentage which would be fair in
one State might be unsatisfactory in another. The reports indicated that
the percentages charged by State agents to their local agencies vary from
2½ to 20 per cent on gross sales, although in one or two instances the
percentage required to be returned to the State agents has exceeded 20
per cent.

Many other subjects of material interest were discussed, and no doubt
exists that the conference will prove to have been of material value
to all who participated in it. The agents who were present were the
following:

    Dr. William Charles White, of Pittsburgh.
    Mr. Frank H. Mann, of New York City.
    Mr. William J. Deeney, of Philadelphia.
    Mr. Karl de Schweinits, of Philadelphia.
    Dr. Hoyt E. Dearholt, of Milwaukee.
    Dr. R. H. Bishop, of Cleveland, O.
    Mr. D. Van Blarcom, of New York City.
    Mr. Ernest D. Easton, of Newark.
    Mr. Severance Burrage, of Indianapolis.
    Mr. H. Wirt Steele, of Baltimore.
    Mr. L. B. Meyers, of Charlotte, N. C.
    Mr. James Jenkins, Jr., of Brooklyn.
    Mr. William C. Smallwood, of Newark.
    Mr. Roy L. French, of Baltimore.
    Mr. Kendall Weisiger, of Atlanta.

Besides the agents above mentioned, there were also present Dr.
Livingston Farrand and Mr. Philip P. Jacobs, of the National Association
for the Study and Prevention of Tuberculosis, and Miss Mabel T. Boardman,
Mr. Ernest P. Bicknell and Mr. Charles L. Magee, of the American Red
Cross.

The National Association for the Study and Prevention of Tuberculosis, as
in 1911 and 1912, has been appointed by the Red Cross as national sales
agent for the Christmas Seals. The appointment of State agents, as in the
past, will be in the hands of the national sales agent.

While it is not possible at this time to publish a complete statement of
returns from the Christmas Seal campaign of 1912, the following figures
will show the results reached by some of the leading agents:


PARTIAL STATEMENT OF THE RESULTS OF CHRISTMAS SEAL SALES FOR 1912
COMPILED FROM THE REPORTS OF AGENTS.

                         _Number       _Number      _Percentage
         _Agency._          of            of            of
                        Seals Rec’d._  Seals Sold._  Seals Sold._

    Arkansas               140,000       118,819       84.8
    California           5,500,000     1,373,520       24.9
    Connecticut—
       Danbury              25,000        15,305       61.2
       Hartford            250,000       148,035       59.2
       Litchfield           40,000        32,960       82.4
       Meriden             100,100         5,554        5.5
       Middletown           75,000        34,741       46.3
       New Britain         125,000        74,257       59.4
       New Haven           600,000       228,220       38.3
       New London           50,000        19,893       39.7
       Norwich             120,000        82,694       68.9
       Stamford             40,000        30,385       75.9
       Waterbury           250,000       184,921       73.9
    Delaware                75,000        42,746       56.9
    District of Columbia   374,500       362,716       96.8
    Georgia              1,800,000       770,770       42.8
    Hawaii                 400,000       179,995       44.9
    Illinois             6,000,000     1,821,520       30.3
    Iowa                 1,500,000       410,440       27.3
    Kentucky—
       Covington           100,000        36,406       36.4
       Cynthiana            10,000         1,205       12.0
       Henderson            50,000        10,040       20.0
       Lexington           140,000        61,505       43.9
       Louisville          300,000       180,446       60.1
       Owensboro            30,000         8,240       27.4
       Paducah             100,000        48,349       48.3
    Louisiana              600,000       281,784       46.8
    Maine                1,500,000       304,884       20.3
    Maryland             1,000,000       512,819       51.2
    Massachusetts—
       Boston            2,500,000     1,353,969       54.1
       Holyoke             100,000        52,114       52.1
       Pittsfield          100,000        71,345       71.3
       Springfield         150,000        89,265       59.5
    Michigan             3,000,000     1,078,464       35.9
    Mississippi            500,000       153,220       30.6
    Montana—
       Billings             75,100        14,870       19.8
       Great Falls          20,000        17,358       86.7
    Nebraska               720,000       289,360       40.1
    New Hampshire          190,000       100,180       52.7
    New York—
       Brooklyn          2,100,000     1,323,220       63.0
       New York City     4,000,000     2,079,324       51.9
    North Carolina         801,500       396,053       49.4
    Oregon               1,000,000       124,536       12.4
    Pennsylvania         2,000,000     1,297,531       64.8
    Rhode Island         2,000,000     1,101,700       55.0
    South Carolina—
       Georgetown           10,000           400        4.0
       Spartanburg          20,000         8,860       44.3
    South Dakota—
       Aberdeen             25,100         5,510       21.9
       Sioux City           40,000         8,929       22.3
    Tennessee            1,000,000       118,300       11.8
    Utah—
       Ogden                50,000         8,000       16.0
       Salt Lake City      100,000       100,000      100.0
    Vermont                125,000        65,786       52.6
    Virginia               250,000       151,450       60.5
    West Virginia          700,000       457,175       65.3
    Wisconsin            3,000,000     2,896,840       96.5
                        ----------    ----------       ----
        Total           45,871,300    20,746,938       45.2

The important position which the Red Cross Christmas Seal now occupies
as a means of support for anti-tuberculosis work in the United States is
indicated by the fact that the sales of the Seal, since its introduction
five years ago, have amounted to a total of more than $1,000,000. Every
year the sale has exceeded that of the year preceding. In 1911 the total
sale amounted to $339,656.08, and it is believed that the complete
reports of the sale in 1912 will show a considerable increase over that
amount.




What the Red Cross Seal Has Done for Brooklyn

JAMES JENKINS, JR., _Executive Secretary, Brooklyn Committee on
Tuberculosis_.


The money made by the Red Cross Christmas Seal has done a very definite
and practical piece of work for Brooklyn, New York. About a year before
the seals were issued, there had been formed in Brooklyn a Tuberculosis
Committee, that had at that time limited funds but was struggling to
carry on various pieces of important and rather expensive work. One of
the needs of the community was more adequate hospital facilities and a
day camp for tubercular patients. The camp was to be established for
mothers and children, and it was hoped at that time that a class might be
formed for children, who could go on with their school duties.

As a result of the first year’s sales about $5,000 was made, and through
the help of the Erie Railroad an old ferryboat was made into a city day
camp and attached to one of the piers of North River, where the air is as
fresh as possible, in such a large city. The first day the camp opened
there were thirty-five cases on the boat and the number has increased,
sometimes slowly but always steadily, until now the capacity of the boat
is 100 patients. The first summer a kindergarten teacher was privately
employed, who entertained the children, but early in the fall a regular
class was established, as an annex to one of the public schools, and it
was the only school in Brooklyn for tubercular children. Now the boat has
three classes, of nearly thirty children each, besides fifteen adults.

When the day camp was established and known as the Red Cross Day Camp,
it was planned by the Tuberculosis Committee to have the city take it
over or share the expenses, if the experiment should prove worth while.
The city very soon recognized the value of the work at the Red Cross
Day Camp and the children were admitted through the city tubercular
clinics. Gradually the city has taken over more and more of the expenses
of the camp, but the boat is still known as the Red Cross Day Camp,
and the money made by the sale of the seals pays the remarkably good
superintendent of the boat, furnishes carfare to and from the camp, for
those patients who cannot afford to pay, and also pays for any special
training which the committee deems valuable to the patients. This year a
cobbling teacher has been employed to teach the boys how to mend their
own shoes; an expert course of corrective exercises was given by a
trained man; chair caning was taught and the adults and older girls are
taught to sew and mend.

The total number of cases admitted to the boat since the beginning is
965. The curative results have been excellent, especially with the
children. At the beginning of the second semester of the school year this
session about one-third of the children were pronounced cured and sent
back to their regular schools.

[Illustration: OPEN AIR SCHOOL FOR TUBERCULAR CHILDREN, BROOKLYN. N. Y.
PHOTOGRAPH SHOWS CHILDREN SLEEPING AFTER LUNCHEON]

In addition to the work of the day camp this year the funds raised by
the Red Cross Christmas Seals will be devoted to the open-air classes
for anemic children in the public schools. There are open-air classes in
eight of the public schools now in Brooklyn. About 300 children attend
these classes and all of them are given some extra nourishment in the
morning and afternoon and a warm lunch at noon, and some extra clothing
was provided by the Board of Education. Special examinations by private
physicians, visits to homes, employment of cooks, supervisor, etc., come
out of the Red Cross money.

The plan adopted in Brooklyn has been to keep the Red Cross money in a
special fund and devote it to some specific work, which interests the
thousands of people who buy seals at Christmas time. Without the help of
the sale of the seals it would have been impossible to have done some of
the most valuable work which has been done for tubercular patients in
Brooklyn.

[Illustration: “FERRY BOAT CAMP.” THE SCHOOL AT PLAY.]




First Aid Department


One of the most successful campaigns conducted by the First
Aid Department of the American Red Cross has been that on the
Missouri-Pacific System, which was completed at Texarkana, Arkansas, on
January 4, 1913. It was begun at Omaha, Nebraska, on the September 16,
1912. A great part of the Missouri-Pacific System was covered during
the ensuing two months and a half, meetings being held at points in
nine different States. The total number of meetings was 234, the total
attendance 14,050, and the total travel 5,752 miles. The employes of this
railroad system were generally greatly interested in learning first aid.
As the direct result of this tour the entire system is to be outfitted
with first aid supplies and the instruction of men in their use is to be
continued systematically.

It is gratifying to be able to record the fact that in the course of
this campaign many public meetings have been held both in Car No. 1 and
in town halls. Several opportunities have been offered to speak on first
aid at high schools, and in one or two towns this subject will be adopted
as part of the curriculum. Many fire and police departments have been
represented at meetings as well as a good number of industries.

Dr. Mackey, in charge of Car No. 1 on his arrival at Texarkana, Texas,
on January 6, made arrangements to hold meetings at schools, factories,
etc., in that town while awaiting a new railroad schedule. The high
school and normal school attendance during this period amounted to 995
persons. The school board of Texarkana has adopted first aid to the
injured as a regular course of study in the high school. The Y. M. C. A.
has installed a complete course and the Texarkana Normal School (colored)
has decided to take up this work. On leaving Texarkana on the 17th of
January, 1913, Dr. Mackey, with Car No. 1, resumed his railroad work on
the St. Louis Southwestern Railroad of Texas. This was continued until
the end of February with a total attendance of 2,085, a total of 30
meetings, and a total travel of 1,274 miles.

The hard and continuous service of Car No. 1 during the past three
years has finally put it out of commission beyond hope of repair. It
is a pleasure to be able to record the fact that the Pullman Company
has generously offered to replace this car with a new one which will
be larger and better suited to Red Cross purposes. It is expected that
this car will be ready for service before this report goes to press.
Meanwhile, Dr. Mackey is devoting his time to the various schools and
industries in the vicinity of Texarkana, Texas.

After what Dr. Davis, in charge of Car No. 2, characterizes as a splendid
campaign over the Philadelphia & Reading System first aid work was taken
up for the Lehigh Valley Railroad. This was begun on December 13, 1912,
and continued to February 7, 1913. The more important points visited and
at which meetings were held were as follows: Jersey City, Perth Amboy,
N. J.; Easton. Pa.; Bethlehem, Pa.; Lehighton, Pa.; Hazleton, Pa.;
Delano, Pa.; Wilkes-Barre, Pa.; Pittston, Pa.; Sayre, Pa.: Auburn, N. Y.;
Manchester, N. Y.; Rochester, N. Y.; Buffalo, N. Y., and Niagara Falls,
N. Y. The total number of miles traveled was 916; 72 meetings were held,
with a total attendance of 3,105. The interest displayed on the Lehigh
Valley has been extremely gratifying.

[Illustration: DR. SHIELDS ILLUSTRATING USE OF RED CROSS TOURNIQUET. THE
COMPRESS IN THIS CASE IS A POCKET KNIFE.]

[Illustration: EMPLOYEES OF THE CHESAPEAKE & POTOMAC TELEPHONE CO.,
WASHINGTON, D. C., UNDER INSTRUCTION IN FIRST AID.]

Dr. Davis also reports that he learned from Mr. J. S. Rockwell, General
Agent, Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburgh Railroad, that since Car No.
2 covered that system last spring the work has been progressing very
favorably under the supervision of the company surgeons. The men and
officers are taking an active part in the movement and the results have
been strikingly successful, not only in respect to proper handling and
dressing of injuries but in a decrease in the number of accidents. A
bulletin is posted each month at the different shops making comparison as
to the number injured for each plant per number employed. Mr. Rockwell
states that it is truly remarkable the way the men from the different
shops are vying with each other in doing everything in their power to
make their particular shops come out at the end of the month with the
fewest injured.

The Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburgh Railroad would like very much to
have another first aid campaign over its lines with the idea of getting
road men thoroughly organized in order that as nearly as possible they
may be on a par with the men employed in the shops. The report from this
railroad is of the greatest importance as it shows the direction which
it is believed first aid should take on railroads generally; first,
the prevention of accidents, and, second, their proper care if they do
unfortunately occur.

As mentioned in the January RED CROSS MAGAZINE, Dr. M. J. Shields. Field
Agent of the First Aid Department of the American Red Cross, has been
carrying on a very successful first aid campaign for the Bell Telephone
Company, spending from December 3, 1912, to February 12, 1913, with the
Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania and from February 14 to March
10, covering the Chesapeake and Potomac Company’s plant. Lectures were
given in Philadelphia and vicinity, Chester, Westchester, West Grove,
Jenkintown, Doylestown, Norristown, Pottstown, and Lancaster in eastern
Pennsylvania: Camden, Atlantic City, Burlington, Bridgetown, and Trenton
in New Jersey, and at Wilmington and Dover in Delaware.

The following offices of the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania were
also visited during January and February: Reading, Allentown, Harrisburg,
Altoona, Lewistown, Bellefonte, Williamsport, Sunbury, Wilkes-Barre,
Scranton, Easton, Pittsburgh, Washington, Uniontown, Greensburg,
Johnstown, New Kensington, Rochester, New Castle, Greenville, Erie,
Warren, Oil City, Bradford, Du Bois, and Butler in Pennsylvania; in West
Virginia, Wheeling, Fairmont, Clarksburg and Parkersburg; and in Ohio,
Marietta, Urieville, Steubenville, and East Liverpool.

In Chesapeake and Potomac territory, Washington, D. C., Baltimore,
Westminister, Frederick, Hagerstown, Queenstown, Salisbury, all in
Maryland were reached as well as Norfolk, Richmond, and Lynchburg in
Virginia and Thurmond, Charleston, Huntington, and Martinsburg in West
Virginia. In all, the number of meetings held was 142, miles traveled
7,500, and attendance 7,950.

Those in attendance at the meetings were principally from the plant
department, the men who build and maintain the telephone lines, put up
ærial and underground cables, and install ’phones, but at nearly every
meeting numbers from the commercial and traffic departments attended.
Special talks were given in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Baltimore, and
Washington, D. C., to the chief operators (women) and matrons on what
to do in sudden illness and emergencies, on how to keep well, and on
personal hygiene. Dr. Shields reports that these lectures were well
received. He also reports that the subject of accident prevention was
taken up and emphasized at each lecture.

Invitations to attend these lectures were extended to the officials and
employes of the various electric light, power and street car companies.
Also to the Western Union, Postal and American Telegraph and Telephoto
companies, with the idea of encouraging a cooperative movement already
started of making a safer arrangement of cross-arms and a better spread
and less dangerous arrangement of high tension wires on poles jointly
used and in underground conduits, thereby cutting down to the minimum the
most distressing of accidents—fatal shock on a pole 30 feet in the air or
in an 8-foot man hole.

[Illustration: DEMONSTRATION OF FIRST AID TO BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY,
PITTSBURGH, “PATIENT”: HAS FRACTURED HIP, FRACTURED LEG AND WOUNDS ON
HEAD.]

The press in the towns and cities visited gave the work good publicity
both in their news columns and editorials. The _Gazette-Times_ of
Pittsburgh, on Sunday, February 16, had a full page with excellent
illustrations. The following is an extract from an editorial in the
_Westminster Maryland Times_ of February 21:

    “Too much cannot be said in praise of the work now being done
    by the Red Cross in educating people to care for themselves and
    others in time of accidents. That such work has great economic,
    as well as sentimental value, is proved by the way the Bell
    Telephone Companies and other large corporations are spending
    money to carry on campaigns, with the help of the Red Cross
    surgeons, that will show their men what they can and should do
    in the way of giving first aid to the injured, before a doctor
    can arrive.”

The _Telephone-News_, January 1st, made first aid and accident prevention
a leading article. The _Transmitter_, published by the Chesapeake &
Potomac Company, in the issue of March 1st had an illustrated article on
the first aid Campaign.

Throughout all this work every assistance was given by the officials and
men and the work was much appreciated by them. No doubt the interest
created will be the means of doing a great deal of good not only among
telephone men but with the public generally, as no business comes into
closer contact with the public than that of the telephone company.




First Aid in Australia


As another exemplification of the frequent assertion that the earth is
not so large after all is a letter which the editor of the RED CROSS
MAGAZINE recently received from Australia. Mr. H. Leslie McWhinney,
of Auburn, Victoria, in some unexplained way, obtained a copy of the
MAGAZINE for October, 1912, and became so interested in the activities
of the American Red Cross that he was moved to write the editor. His
letter contains so much information relative to the work of the First Aid
Volunteer Association in Australia that a portion of it is quoted here,
as follows:

“First aid work in Australia is organized and conducted by the St. John
Ambulance Association, an English institution, which conducts first aid
and nursing classes, and has a permanent ambulance service in most of the
capital cities of the six States. It also has an organization called the
St. John Ambulance Brigade, consisting of men’s and women’s (nursing)
divisions. Sydney and Brisbane have civil ambulances as well. In
Melbourne we have the First Aid Volunteer Association, owing allegiance
to St. John’s, but acting quite independently of it.

“This association had its origin in the visit of the American fleet in
1908, when this country became wild with enthusiasm and large crowds
visited the seaports to see the fleet. The Melbourne City Council,
expecting large crowds and many accidents, called for volunteers holding
first aid certificates, and a number responded, and rendered good
service. Afterwards Mr. W. F. Pratt, our present secretary, suggested
that those on duty should form a practice society, and this was done, the
First Aid Volunteer Association being formed.

“Our membership has increased from 40 to 110, and is now growing
rapidly; the average attendance at weekly meetings ranges from 30 to 40
and at lectures from 60 to 80. We encourage people interested in first
aid to visit our meetings and send members out to help class secretaries.
We also supply members for first aid duty at large public meetings,
exhibitions, missions and other gatherings. Last year our members
attended the Scoville Mission for six weeks, treating 44 cases; the
Alexander-Chapman Mission (4 weeks), and several other large gatherings.
A hygiene exhibition opens in Melbourne next week and we have agreed to
supply 12 members a night for four weeks. We make no charge, and our
members take no payment. Of course, we are willing to accept donations to
our funds, but do not ask for them.

“We have a stretcher and a first class kit and plenty of bandages,
besides medical instruments for use on duty by any medical man who
happens along. At our monthly outings, which take place out of the city
on Saturday afternoons, the secretary prepares a list of accidents,
labels various ‘patients,’ and the other members have to work in pairs,
being allowed one bandage apiece and having to improvise the others.
Average attendance is thirty. We usually do a little propaganda work at
these outings, inviting the local class secretaries to bring along their
pupils, if any.”

Of course, the readers of the RED CROSS MAGAZINE will understand the
difference between this First Aid Society in Australia and the American
Red Cross. The First Aid Volunteer Association was organized with only
one purpose in view, that of practicing first aid, and one of the
conditions of membership is that the applicant must have received a
first aid certificate; whereas the activities of the American Red Cross
have many ramifications and any reputable citizen of the United States
may become a member thereof simply upon the payment of dues. Membership
in the First Aid Association in Australia is rather analogous to
membership in the classes throughout the United States organized by the
First Aid Department of the American Red Cross.

It is interesting to note that the arrival of the American fleet in
Australian waters in 1908 was the prime cause for the organization of the
First Aid Volunteer Association.

[Illustration: “BROKEN THIGH.” FIRST AID PRACTICE.]




Red Cross Nursing Service

MISS JANE A. DELANO, _Chairman National Committee._


The rapid development of the Nursing Service of the Red Cross and the
solidarity of its various activities are encouraging signs of future
growth and more extended usefulness.

Our state and local committees of nurses, organized primarily for the
enrollment of Red Cross nurses, have responded with enthusiasm whenever
new demands have been made upon them. We now have more than five hundred
representative nurses serving on these committees throughout the United
States, and their co-operation and interest may be depended upon to
further any work undertaken by the Red Cross. They have been most
active in the sale of Christmas Seals and have co-operated with local
tuberculosis agencies, often serving on special committees. In organizing
our Rural Nursing Service we have sought their advice and assistance.
They have suggested nurses for rural work and have given valuable
information in regard to the needs of their own communities. Further
details concerning this important service is given by Miss Clement,
superintendent of rural nurses.

Our local committees are found ready to assist in relief work at
celebrations and parades, and appreciate the opportunities for experience
thus offered. The District of Columbia committee, of which Miss Anna J.
Greenlees is chairman, secured the nurses required for relief stations
established in Washington during inaugural week. A report of the work of
these stations appears in this number of the MAGAZINE.

The National Committee on Nursing Service, in co-operation with the First
Aid Department, has been authorized by the Red Cross to organize classes
of instruction for women in Home Nursing and First Aid. Once more we must
appeal to our local committees of nurses for their assistance. The plan
adopted requires that the instruction in Home Nursing shall be given
by enrolled Red Cross nurses, who must, in a large measure, be secured
through the local committees. As the work develops we hope that nurses
especially qualified to instruct women in the principles of right living
and the home care of the sick may be found willing to devote their whole
time to this instruction. Even two classes a day would give a fair income
and an opportunity to render valuable service to a community. Information
concerning these classes for women is given in this issue by Miss Oliver,
in charge of their organization.

Believing that the course in first aid adopted by the Red Cross would
be valuable even to graduate nurses, arrangements have been made with
the First Aid Department to allow enroled Red Cross nurses to take this
course at home. The textbook written by Major Charles Lynch must be used,
and nurses who so desire will be allowed to take an examination under the
direction of a physician appointed by the Red Cross. To those who pass
this examination a Red Cross First Aid Certificate will be issued.


RURAL NURSING

MISS FANNIE F. CLEMENT, _Superintendent of Rural Nurses._

Before the Red Cross entered the field of rural nursing several attempts
were made to extend this work on a broad plan into the country districts.
After the Peace Conference, held at Portsmouth, N. H., in 1905, the
Russian and Japanese envoys made a gift of $20,000 to the State, to be
used for charitable purposes. At this time several persons who realized
that rural nursing was an important factor in the improvement of social
conditions tried to have this sum used in establishing a state-wide
system. It was not possible, however, to convince those in authority that
this would be the best disposition of the gift. It was the aim of the
Holman Association, incorporated in 1911, “for the promotion of rural
nursing, hygiene and social service.” to expand as resources permitted to
meet the needs of rural communities in the United States, but the society
has recently been disbanded.

There are but few instances where rural nursing has been extended by a
single organization to cover any considerable area. A pioneer work was
started seventeen years ago in North Westchester county, New York, where
the District Nursing Association now employ six nurses and covers about
twenty villages. Gradually new districts in the surrounding territory are
being opened up by the association.

There are, however, several individual nurses meeting the needs of rural
communities, and often under trying conditions. In isolated regions they
are cut off from helpful association with others doing similar work and
the stimulus that comes from identification with an extensive organized
effort. The Red Cross has planned a service of which these nurses may
become a part, which will assist them to establish and maintain high
standards.

Rural nursing as it now exists is generally carried on under the
supervision of a committee which may include several sub-committees.
These are responsible for various branches of the nurses’ work. Wherever
such committees are able to arouse a general interest much has been
accomplished not only in behalf of public health, but in many lines of
public welfare work.

It is expected that in the development of Red Cross rural nursing,
local committees will be created, meeting standards of salary and other
regulations which are deemed necessary to insure the best interests of
a community. The locality benefitted by the work of a nurse is expected
to meet the expenses connected with it. Fees collected from patients
are not sufficient for this, as all sick persons are not able to pay
for the services of the nurse. As a rule, patients are expected to pay
for professional visits, according to their means, but those unable to
make any payments should not go uncared for. The responsibility for
raising the necessary funds rests with the local committee, which also
superintends the work of the nurse.

A general supervision by the Red Cross is maintained through occasional
visits of the superintendent of rural nurses and through monthly reports
of their work.

During the 1910 Red Cross Christmas Seal sale, the Anti-Tuberculosis
Association of Wisconsin, offered the services of a visiting nurse for
one month to twelve cities of a limited population, making the highest
per capita sale. The Red Cross Seal Committee of Ohio, in 1912, sent a
visiting nurse for one month to each of twelve small cities throughout
the State as a prize in the seal-selling contest. Interest in visiting
nursing was thus stimulated to a degree that several of these towns
have since been insisting upon a permanent nurse, and have raised funds
necessary for her support.

Hospitals, dispensaries and medical attendance are seldom as accessible
in the country as in cities. To have the rural nurse a resident in the
community, her services for all regardless of any lines of distinction,
to have intelligent nursing care for patients in their own homes, and
instruction and demonstration given in the principles of hygiene, not
only of person but as applied to home surroundings, are advantages which
have been appreciated wherever the visiting nurse is established.

The best physicians have welcomed her assistance. No stronger testimony
to the value of her services is needed than the present demand for public
health workers in connection with industrial establishments, department
stores, religious and civic institutions and health departments of city,
town and county.

Women of the finest type are needed for this work and those who have
had specialized training in public health activities. Several visiting
nursing associations to be utilized as training centers for Red Cross
nurses offer good opportunities for students to become familiar with
social work of various kinds through lectures, study courses and
affiliations with philanthropic societies in the city. Nurses may thus
come in contact with milk stations, dispensaries, tuberculosis and
charity organization societies, settlements and other social agencies.

Nurses eligible for appointment to the Rural Nursing Service, who have
not already had experience or training in visiting nursing, after a
minimum period of three months with a city nursing association will be
placed one month with an association in the country, thus giving them
actual experience in rural nursing and its problems before assignment
to their post of duty. It is important that the rural nurse be informed
upon the various branches of public health nursing and social service,
as carried on in cities, in order that she may initiate work along these
lines in country places where it is often wholly unorganized. She should
be able to recognize contagious diseases and minor ailments among school
children. By giving simple health talks in the schools, she is able to
utilize one of the most advantageous avenues for influencing the home
life of her people.

Local societies and clubs, the aim of which is to improve unfavorable
conditions that exist in their communities can establish a no more
fruitful source of helpfulness than by the employment of a visiting
nurse. Red Cross Chapters will find in such an undertaking not only
a means of creating interest in local work of the Red Cross, but
opportunity of enlarging their field of usefulness to the community.
The experience of the Red Cross Chapter in Islip, Long Island, in the
employment of a rural nurse has long ago proven the value of this plan of
work.


HOME NURSING AND FIRST AID INSTRUCTION FOR WOMEN

MISS MARION L. OLIVER, _In Charge of Organization of Classes._

Believing that the physical welfare of the race depends largely upon
home conditions and that the women of the nation have a very definite
responsibility in maintaining the health of the family, the American Red
Cross has undertaken to organize on a national scale classes for women
in home nursing and first aid. It is hoped that this instruction will
make them better home makers, better mothers and better citizens. Before
describing what has been accomplished in this direction, it is best
to give details of the plan adopted. This can be done most briefly by
quoting from the official circular relating to the same.


PLAN OF INSTRUCTION FOR WOMEN.

The American Red Cross has decided to organize classes of instruction
for women in first aid, home nursing, hygiene and allied subjects, to
be given under the supervision of the National Committee on Red Cross
Nursing Service.


OBJECTS.

1. To afford women the opportunity to learn first aid to the injured, and
to provide simple instruction in the home care of the sick.

2. To afford women the opportunity to learn how to prepare food for sick
and well.

3. To afford women the opportunity to learn how to prepare rooms and
other places for the reception of ill and injured.

4. To afford women the opportunity to learn how to protect their own
health and that of their families.

It must be distinctly understood that this course of instruction for
women is only intended to prepare them to render emergency assistance in
case of accident, to give more intelligent care to their own families
under competent direction, and, in exceptional cases, to assist in relief
work under the supervision of the Nursing Service of the American Red
Cross.


NEED.

Much needless suffering is now caused the ill and injured on account
of the ignorance of unskilled persons. It has been said that the fate
of the injured is dependent on the care which their injuries first
receive. It is therefore necessary for everybody to learn what to do
first in an emergency, and what not to do. This is easy to learn, but the
subject must be learned. Nobody can be expected to know this without
instruction. The number of people injured in the United States is rapidly
mounting and is now in the hundreds of thousands annually. Knowledge
of first aid to the injured cannot, it is true, prevent the consequent
suffering entirely, but it can be made an important factor in this result.

The health of the family depends largely upon the home maker, and it
is most essential that she have a definite knowledge of personal and
household hygiene and the proper preparation of food. Special diet for
the sick is no less essential. Scarcely any woman is unacquainted with
the sick room in her own family, and some simple instruction in the care
of the sick should be a part of every woman’s education.

It is the purpose of the Red Cross to provide for this instruction.


RESULTS.

This work is just being started in this country, so that great results
cannot yet be reported. It has already been demonstrated here, however,
that instruction in first aid will reduce deaths and serious results
from injuries about one-half. On railroads and everywhere else that the
American Red Cross has carried first aid instruction, all interested are
enthusiastic in praise of the benefits derived. In other countries, such
as Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Russia, work of a similar
character to that contemplated for women has been done for many years
and all testimony goes to show that the public has largely benefited
therefrom.


COURSE OF INSTRUCTION.

Ten lessons in First Aid.

Fifteen lessons in Hygiene and Home Nursing.

Fifteen lessons in Dietetics and Household Economy.

All instruction will be very practical and pupils will, as far as
possible, be required actually to do everything described in the
teaching. Lessons in either First Aid or Home Nursing may be given
first, but both these courses of lessons must be completed and
certificates must be held in both by those desiring to take further
instruction.

No two courses of instruction may be taken at the same time.

All first aid courses must be given by a physician and other instructions
by a Red Cross nurse, unless otherwise authorized by the Red Cross.


ORGANIZATION OF CLASSES.

Women desiring to form a class in either first aid or home nursing should
secure a sufficient number of names—not less than ten or more than
twenty-five—selecting one to act as president. The president so selected
should then communicate with the Department of Instruction for Women,
American Red Cross, Washington, D. C. A roll will be supplied on which
the names of the members of the class will be inscribed and answers given
in respect to certain essentials.

No one under sixteen years of age is eligible for these classes.

It will be necessary locally to obtain the services of a physician or a
nurse to give the instruction, whose name and address should be forwarded
to Washington with required roll of proposed class. All instructions must
be approved, and a card of authorization issued, by the Red Cross before
any course is begun.

The instructors’ fees, if any, must be paid locally, and arrangements for
the same must be made by the class with the instructor selected.

It will also be necessary to provide a meeting place.

Books and charts will be supplied by the Red Cross. The cost of these
will be $1 per member for each course of ten lessons, and $1.50 per
member for each course of fifteen lessons. Payment for the same should
be made in advance. The president will be responsible for collecting and
forwarding this amount to Washington.


EXAMINATIONS AND CERTIFICATES.

On the completion of each course of instruction an examiner will be
appointed, to be paid by the Red Cross. Such examiner will be other than
the instructor of the class.

No one will be allowed to take an examination in any course who has not
attended at least three-fourths of the lessons of that course.

Certificates will be given successful candidates at the conclusion of
each course of instruction.

After fulfilling the requirements for the organization of a class
and the instructor has been formally appointed the class is free to
begin work, and very interesting work it proves to be. The course of
instruction in first aid begins with an introductory lesson in anatomy
and physiology followed by nine lessons with practical demonstration in
the care of emergencies and accidents most likely to be met with in the
every-day walks of life. It is most desirable that each pupil be given
an opportunity to practice on a model or manikin the various points
covered in the lessons. After the ten lessons are over, those members
of a class who have not been absent more than three times, are ready
for examination. This is given by a physician other than the instructor
of the class who is appointed direct from the first aid office. The
examination is one-third oral, one-third written and one-third practical.

There are fifteen lessons in the Home Nursing course, and these should
prove of absorbing interest and practical value to every one. The
preliminary lessons deal with matters relating to the healthfulness of
the home, such as contamination of food and its prevention, sources of
impurities in water and air, personal hygiene and the preservation of
health. Then follows simple instruction in the home care of the sick, how
to make a sick bed, to transfer a patient from bed to chair, the general
care of a patient, including baths and the use of ordinary sickroom
appliances. For example, the theory of bed-making was being taught in
one of our classes the other day, and after the instructing nurse had
finished her lecture, every member of the class had to make the bed with
and without the patient, the patient in this case being a life-sized doll
covered with oilcloth so that it could be bathed. Several members of the
class did not make the beds satisfactorily and were told to practice
at home so that at the next lesson they could do better. A special
examination also follows this course.

After those Home Nursing lessons are over, it is planned to have a series
of lectures on home economics and dietetics.

So much for the plans and organization, now for the actual classes. The
records show that on March 30th almost six hundred women are taking this
instruction.

Twenty-four classes in First Aid and three in Home Nursing have been
formed in different localities. Both the Young Women’s Christian
Association and the Girls’ Friendly Society have become interested in
this work.

In Genesee, New York, the fox-hunting community has formed a large class
for women to teach them to cope with the accidents of the hunting field.

In Manchester, Connecticut, where the Cheney Brothers have their big
silk mills, classes in both First Aid and Home Nursing have been
organized among the employes.

In Cincinnati a group of society women are taking the First Aid course.

In one of the suburbs of Washington, a group of young mothers have formed
a class.

Other classes are active in Lexington, Ky., Providence, R. I., Detroit,
Mich., North Attleboro, Milton and Manchester, Mass., Milwaukee, Wis.,
York, Pa., Philadelphia, Pa., and Washington, D. C.

Two classes have been formed by the wives of the officers of the Army and
the Navy, and we hope that in time every Army post and Naval stations
will have its regular classes in First Aid and Home Nursing, and that
this work will not only be for the officers’ wives but for the wives of
the enlisted men as well.

Al the end of each set of classes there is an examination and those who
successfully pass receive a Red Cross certificate.

It is also planned that a field day will be held in each State that has
enough classes to warrant it and at this field day First Aid teams of
women will compete for a Bronze Medal. The rules for such a competition
will be supplied upon request.

[Illustration]




The Red Cross at the Inauguration


The Red Cross participated actively in the care of ill and injured during
the various ceremonies incident to the inauguration of President Wilson,
March 4, 1913.

On the morning of Sunday, March 2, a small emergency hospital was
established in a room set aside for the purpose at the Union Station.
This continued in operation till the morning of Thursday, March 6, and
was open for patients day and night.

On the morning of March 3, two small Red Cross tent hospitals were
opened, one in rear of the Sherman Statue and the other in Lafayette
Square. These were in operation till the close of the Suffrage Parade the
same afternoon. In addition five ambulances were stationed along the line
of march for this parade. Two of these were near the Peace Monument, one
at Seventh street, one at Twelfth street, and one at Fifteenth street.
Very few patients sought assistance or were brought to these hospitals
or ambulances on this afternoon. All received were promptly treated and
properly disposed of.

On March 4, the day of the inauguration, besides the hospital at Union
Station the Red Cross had in its charge tent hospitals east of the
Capitol, in rear of the Sherman Statue and in Lafayette Square. The
second was also open during the fireworks or till about 11 p. m.

At these stations the number of patients treated was as follows:

    Union Station            64
    East of the Capitol      23
    Rear of Sherman Statue   19
    Lafayette Square         12
    Ambulances, March 3      15
                            ---
                            133

Major Charles Lynch. Medical Corps, U. S. A., was in charge of the
emergency service. Miss Jane A. Delano, Chairman of the Nursing Committee
of the American Red Cross, acted for that committee in the necessary
arrangements so far as it was concerned. Miss Anna J. Greenlees served
as director of Red Cross nurses, and Mrs. Theodora North McLaughlin
represented the District Chapter. The physicians on duty at the stations
were members of the Inaugural Sub-committee on Ambulances and Hospitals.
The nurses were Red Cross nurses of the District of Columbia and the Boy
Scouts were supplied by the local Boy Scout organization.

It will be noted that no very great demands were made on the emergency
service of the Red Cross during the inaugural period. Most of the
patients required rest rather than medication or hospital treatment. This
they were able to obtain at the Red Cross Stations. These also sheltered
a few cases of serious illness and for all everything possible was done.

The weather conditions were in marked contrast with those of four years
ago, which contributed largely to reducing the number of cases requiring
emergency treatment.

The thanks of the Red Cross are due to the following physicians, nurses
and Boy Scouts for services which, while by no means spectacular, were
thoroughly creditable in every respect.


UNION STATION.


_Physicians._

Dr. J. J. Madigan, Red Cross Director; Doctors R. E. Ledbetter, Chas.
W. Allen, C. N. Chipman, Wm. J. G. Thomas, Elmer Sothoron, J. Franklin
Hilton, Philip Newton, H. F. Sawtelle, T. Victor Hammond, John P.
Gunion, Alfred Richards, R. F. Tobin, W. C. Gwynn, Jas. G. Townsend, J.
A. O’Donoghue, Joseph C. Leonard, H. C. Duffey, G. B. Heinecke, J. E.
Lind, and Edgar Snowden.


_Nurses._

Sallie F. Melhorn, Susie A. Mortimer, Katherine Von Brodt, Charlotte H.
Barnes, Ethel H. Brown, Winona R. Taylor.


EAST OF CAPITOL.


_Physicians._

Dr. Alfred Richards, Red Cross Director; Doctors Carl Haas, Roy Dunmire
and Stuart C. Johnson.


_Nurses._

Mrs. M. J. Johnson and Mrs. Emil A. Fenstad.


REAR OF SHERMAN STATUE.


_Physicians._

Dr. Frank E. Gibson, Red Cross Director; Doctors J. R. Ramsburgh, Oscar
Wilkinson and O. Cox.


_Nurses._

Misses Agnes Hayes, Mary Davis, Kathryne Donnelly, Lena Bauer, A. L.
Goodheart, Pricilla Page, Keiningham, Sewell, Cora Wynkoop and Zaidee
Kibler.


_Boy Scouts._

Arnel Carpenter, Clarence Shrout, Ernest Utz and Waldo Jones.


_Troop 37, Somerset, Maryland._

Dwight Terry, Raymond Henderson, Mark Shoemaker, Leslie Stimpson, Silas
Hayes, Talbot Barnard, Charles Shoemaker and William Probey.

It is to be regretted that the names of all the Boy Scouts, who
invariably did good work, were not recorded.

[Illustration: CROWDS IN FRONT OF THE CAPITOL DURING THE INAUGURATION OF
PRESIDENT WILSON.

© Harris-Ewing]


LAFAYETTE SQUARE.


_Physicians._

Dr. William P. Reeves, Red Cross Director; Doctors Philip Newton and
Albert G. Wenzell.


_Nurses._

Mrs. L. A. Weed, Mrs. J. J. Johnson, Misses J. Allan, Mary W. Cox, Mary
F. Sewall and Bernice Keiningham.

The Ford Motor Car Company through its local agent, Miller Brothers, was
also good enough to give an automobile for inspection purposes on the day
of the Inauguration.

[Illustration: ILLUMINATION OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE ON THE NIGHTS OF THE
4TH AND 5TH OF MARCH]

The expenses involved were paid from Inaugural and Red Cross funds.
They were small as all served without pay except the nurses at the Union
Station on whose time much greater demands were made than on other
personnel.

The expenditures in detail were as follows:

                _Inaugural Funds._

    Nurses at Union Station             $56.00
    Medical supplies used                16.00
                                        ------
      Total                             $62.00

                _Red Cross Funds._

    Miscellaneous supplies, lunches,
      tent floors, etc.                 $61.40
                                       -------
      Grand total                      $123.40




The Endowment Fund Committees

WORK ACCOMPLISHED


                                                       December 31, 1912.

  Amount to be raised                                         $2,000,000.00
  Amount raised and in Red Cross Treasury to date $820,221.67
  Amount in hands of Endowment Fund Committees
    and not yet transferred (reported)              81,657.98
                                                  -----------    901,879.65
                                                              -------------
  Amount yet to be raised                                     $1,098,120.35

                                                                 Percentage
  Committee           Apportionment   Raised      Plus      Minus    raised

  Akron, Ohio               6,000      250.00              5,750.00      4
  Albany, N. Y.            10,000                         10,000.00
  Amesbury, Mass.              90      190.00     100.00               211
  Atlanta, Ga.             15,000                         15,000.00
  Baltimore, Md.           55,000    8,555.00             46,445.00     15
  Berkshire County, Mass.  10,500   10,500.00
  Boston, Mass.            67,000   27,633.62             39,366.38     41
  Buffalo, N. Y.           42,000                         42,000.00
  Burlington, Iowa          2,500                          2,500.00
  Canal Zone                  700      709.63       9.63                101
  Canton, Ohio              5,000                          5,000.00
  Charleston, S. C.         5,000                          5,000.00
  Chattanooga, Tenn.        4,000      245.00              3,755.00      6
  Chicago, Ill.           218,000   78,000.00            140,000.00     35
  Cincinnati, Ohio         36,000   18,487.06             17,512.94     51
  Cleveland, Ohio          56,000                         56,000.00
  Columbus, Ohio           18,000                         18,000.00
  Dallas, Texas             9,000                          9,000.00
  Dayton, Ohio             11,000                         11,000.00
  Denver, Colo.            21,000      500.00             20,500.00      2
  Detroit, Mich.           46,000   10,005.00             35,995.00     21
  Duluth, Minn.             7,800                          7,800.00
  Grand Rapids, Mich.      11,000                         11,000.00
  Hampden County, Mass.     8,000      813.00              7,187.00     10
  Harrisburg, Pa.           6,000                          6,000.00
  Hartford, Conn.           9,800    5,514.60              4,285.40     56
  Hyde Park, N. Y.                     600.00
  Indianapolis, Ind.       23,000    4,807.68             18,192.32     20
  Kansas City, Mo.         24,000                         24,000.00
  Los Angeles, Cal.        31,000                         31,000.00
  Louisville, Ky.          22,000                         22,000.00
  Lowell, Mass.            10,000    1,871.50              8,128.50     18
  Magnolia, Mass.              30       62.00      32.00               206
  Manchester, Mass.           270    2,057.11   1,787.11               761
  Massillon, Ohio           1,300                          1,300.00
  Memphis, Tenn.           13,000                         13,000.00
  Nashville, Tenn.         11,000                         11,000.00
  Newark, N. J.            34,000                         34,000.00
  New Haven. Conn.         13,000    6,840.83              6,159.17     52
  New York, N. Y.         476,000  510,821.00  34,821.00               107
  Omaha, Nebr.             13,000                         13,000.00
  Paterson, N. J.          12,000                         12,000.00
  Philadelphia, Pa.       154,000                        154,000.00
  Pittsburgh, Pa.          53,000      105.00             52,895.00    1-5
  Portland, Oreg.          20,700                         20,700.00
  Rhode Island             54,000                         54,000.00
  Richmond, Va.            12,000                         12,000.00
  Rochester, N. Y.         21,800                         21,800.00
  San Antonio, Texas        9,000      500.00              8,500.00      5
  San Francisco, Cal.      41,000   75,668.34  34,668.34               184
  Schenectady, N. Y.        7,000                          7,000.00
  Scranton, Pa.            12,900    8,021.08              4,878.92     62
  Seattle, Wash.           23,700                         23,700.00
  St. Louis, Mo.           68,000   70,630.84   2,630.84               103
  St. Paul, Minn.          21,000      198.00             20,802.00  47-50
  Toledo, Ohio             16,000                         16,000.00
  Troy, N. Y.               7,000                          7,000.00
  Utica, N. Y.              7,000                          7,000.00
  Washington, D. C.        33,000   33,890.04     890.04               102
  Wilkes-Barre, Pa.         6,000                          6,000.00
  Worcester, Mass.         14,000       50.00             13,950.00   5-14
  Youngstown, Ohio          7,000      550.00              6,450.00      7

In the case of Scranton the committee in a short time after its
organization secured $8,000 of its $12,000 apportionment. By reason of
a serious mine disaster in the vicinity of Scranton the members of the
committee were compelled to devote their efforts to the raising of a
large relief fund. The Red Cross has therefore accepted the $8,000 as
completing Scranton’s apportionment.

[Illustration]




ADVERTISEMENTS


    OFFICERS

    PRESIDENT

      Charles C. Glover

    VICE PRESIDENTS

      Milton E. Ailes
      William J. Flather

    CASHIER

      Henry H. Flather

    ASS’T CASHIER

      Joshua Evans, Jr.

                           [Illustration]

                       CAPITAL     $1,000,000
                       SURPLUS      2,000,000

    DIRECTORS

      Charles C. Glover
      Thomas Hyde
      James M. Johnston
      Wm. J. Flather
      R. Ross Perry
      Henry Hurt
      John R. McLean
      F. A. Vanderlip
      Milton E. Ailes
      Henry H. Flather
      H. Rozier Dulany
      Frederic D. McKenney
      Frank C. Henry
      Willard H. Brownson
      Charles I. Corby
      Sylvester W. Labrot

    Strength and conservatism in a bank are two of the most
    important things to be considered in selecting a depositary for
    your funds.

    ¶ The resources of this time-tested institution, amounting to
    over $14,000,000, afford ample protection to its depositors.

    ¶ The conservative policy of its management, backed by years of
    experience, assures careful attention to all banking matters
    entrusted to its care.

    ¶ Dependable connections in all the principal cities of the
    United States and abroad enable us to handle with expedition
    collections on any point in the world.

    ¶ Letters of Credit and Travelers’ Checks issued available the
    world over.

    ¶ Investments made for customers.

    _Correspondence Invited_

                          Riggs National Bank
                        1501 Pennsylvania Avenue
                           WASHINGTON, D. C.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN RED CROSS MAGAZINE (VOL. 8, NO. 2, APRIL 1913) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


