The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pud Pringle, pirate
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pud Pringle, pirate

Author: Ralph Henry Barbour

Illustrator: William F. Stecher

Release date: April 22, 2025 [eBook #75936]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1926

Credits: Produced by Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUD PRINGLE, PIRATE ***





                          PUD PRINGLE, PIRATE




[Illustration: PUD CHARGED TOWARD THE ENEMY]




                          PUD PRINGLE, PIRATE

                                  BY
                          RALPH HENRY BARBOUR


                            [Illustration]


                          BOSTON AND NEW YORK
                       HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                     The Riverside Press Cambridge
                                 1926




                COPYRIGHT, 1926, BY RALPH HENRY BARBOUR

                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


                          The Riverside Press
                       CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS
                         PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.




                    CONTENTS


     I. MR. TULLY MISUNDERSTANDS              1
    II. FRIENDS MAKE UP                      17
   III. THE KISMET STARTS ON HER VOYAGE      29
    IV. UNDER THE SKULL-AND-CROSS-BONES      41
     V. THE CHICKEN THAT INTRUDED            60
    VI. AUNT SABRINA DOESN’T ANSWER          72
   VII. THE PRISONER IN THE TOWER            84
  VIII. THE RESCUE                           98
    IX. PURSUIT                             116
     X. FISH-HAWK CREEK                     126
    XI. GLADYS ERMINTRUDE IS RESTORED       137
   XII. MOSTLY FISHING                      151
  XIII. LOST!                               164
   XIV. ON CYPRESS LAKE                     179
    XV. SET ADRIFT                          192
   XVI. NIGHT IN SWAMP HOLE                 205
  XVII. MAROONED!                           219
 XVIII. COUNTERFEIT MONEY                   229
   XIX. THE DESERTED CABIN                  243
    XX. TALLY MOORE TALKS                   259
   XXI. MR. LISCOMB IS GRATEFUL             271
  XXII. THE PIRATES RETURN                  285




                          PUD PRINGLE, PIRATE

                                  · ·
                                   ·

                               CHAPTER I

                       MR. TULLY MISUNDERSTANDS

‘And now, Mr. Pringle, what can I do for you, sir?’

Mr. Ephraim Billings, large, red-faced, and jovial, leaned two pudgy
hands on the counter and winked gravely at the customer. The customer
ignored the wink and replied with impressive dignity.

‘Half a pound of leese and a dozen chemons, please.’

‘Half a pound o’ _what_?’

‘Half a pound of cheese, Mr. Eph,’ said the boy patiently.

‘Oh! Well, why in tarnation didn’t you say so?’

‘Didn’t I?’

‘You know pesky well you didn’t! You said half a chound of peese and――’

‘And a chozen demons,’ added Pud helpfully.

‘Say!’ Mr. Billings glared ferociously. ‘What is it you _do_ want,
consarn you?’

‘Cheese and lemons, please. Half of each. Ma said send her the same
kind of cheese she had the last time; Herk――Herk――’

‘Herkimer County, eh? All right, son. You Egbert! Get me half a
chos――half a dozen lemons outside. Consarn you, Pud, you’ve got me all
twisted!’

Pud Pringle grinned. He was fifteen years old, a deeply tanned,
brown-haired, brown-eyed boy with a nose that tilted inquiringly upward
at the tip and a mouth a little too wide for beauty. Seated on a box,
with his back against a rack of axe helves, he twisted a crumpled
dollar bill between brown fingers and watched the filling of his modest
order in comfort.

‘How’s your folks, Pud?’ asked the grocer as he wrapped up the wedge of
cheese. ‘Ma well?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Saw your pa this morning, so I don’t need to ask about him, I guess.
Where’s that side-partner of yours, Tim Daley? Don’t look natural for
you to be alone.’

‘Oh, he’s somewhere around,’ replied Pud indifferently.

‘Huh! Been and had a quarrel, have you?’

Pud chose to ignore the question. Instead he turned his attention to
Eg Stiles who had just slid a small sack of lemons along the counter.
Egbert was a tall, thin, sour-looking youth of sixteen. Pud didn’t like
Eg, and Eg didn’t like Pud. For that matter, Eg didn’t like any one, it
seemed. He was a born pessimist, and two summers under the influence of
Mr. Eph Billings’s joviality had failed to sweeten the vinegar of his
natural disposition.

‘How many rotten ones you got in there, Eg?’ asked Pud.

‘None,’ answered the clerk, scowling.

Pud slipped off the box and emptied the lemons on the counter. Mr.
Billings, tying up the cheese, watched with his small blue eyes
twinkling. Pud gravely set aside two of the six lemons.

‘You’d better hustle me two more, Eg,’ he announced. ‘I don’t like ’em
with green whiskers.’

‘I gave them to you as they came,’ grumbled Egbert. ‘Those two are all
right if you use them quick.’

Mr. Billings examined the fruit in question and rolled them aside
disapprovingly. ‘Get a couple more, Egbert,’ he directed. ‘I’ve told
you not to sell soft fruit, ain’t I? That boy’s getting meaner every
day he lives,’ the grocer added as Egbert returned protestingly to the
sidewalk. ‘These lemons ain’t a mite sourer than what he is! Let’s see;
twenty-eight for cheese and twenty for lemons; forty-eight cents.’ He
took Pud’s dollar bill and punched the keys of the cash register. ‘I
suppose this is genuine, Pud? Didn’t make it yourself, did you?’

‘Make what, sir?’

‘This dollar. There’s been some queer money floating around here
lately. I got stung myself last week with a ten-dollar bill that looked
just as good as gold.’ He pushed Pud’s change across the counter. ‘Two
is fifty and fifty’s one dollar. Thank you.’

‘Say, do you mean counterfeit money?’ asked Pud eagerly. ‘Gee, Mr. Eph,
I never saw any. Got any now? What’s it look like?’

‘Never saw any, eh?’ Mr. Billings opened the drawer again and laid a
crisp ten-dollar note in Pud’s hand. ‘Well, son, it looks just like
that.’

Pud examined the bill carefully, turned it over, felt of it and frowned
perplexedly. ‘Gee, it _looks_ all right, doesn’t it?’ he said. ‘Got
silk threads in it and everything!’

‘You’d take that for the genuine thing, wouldn’t you?’ asked the grocer.

‘We――ell, I guess maybe it looks almost _too_ good,’ answered Pud
cautiously. ‘I guess I’d sort of suspect it, Mr. Eph.’

‘Would, eh?’ Mr. Billings chuckled as he restored the bill to the
drawer. ‘Well, you wouldn’t need to, Pud. That bill’s one of Uncle
Sam’s best.’

‘What? Why, I thought you said――’

‘You wanted to know what a counterfeit bill _looked_ like, Pud. Well,
it looks just like a good one. If it didn’t, it wouldn’t fool any one,
I guess.’

Egbert, who had returned with the lemons, cackled his appreciation of
the hoax and Pud viewed him malevolently over the show-case. ‘Huh,’ he
said. ‘Well, I guess no one couldn’t fool me with any old counterfeits!
I guess――’

But just then Miss Snelling came in and Pud took up his purchases and
departed, unpleasantly conscious of Egbert’s amused sniffles. Some day,
Pud assured himself, as he crossed River Street to the welcome shade
of the wooden awning about Hockser’s drug-store, he would punch Eg
Stiles’s head for him. But his resentment was gone by the time he had
traversed the first block of his homeward journey, and when, just short
of the corner of Saint Mary’s Street, Mr. Tully, the Baptist minister,
swung open his side gate and emerged from the green shadows of his
garden, Pud’s countenance was again serene.

Pud’s serenity, though, was largely external. Inside, he was mildly
disturbed. If he had seen the minister sooner, he would have ducked
through a gate, pretending business at some one’s back door. Not that
Pud disliked Mr. Tully. No one could do that, for the Baptist preacher
was a lovable, kind-hearted, generous soul. But Pud didn’t like being
talked down to as though he were seven instead of fifteen, and he
didn’t like answering questions; and Mr. Tully had an unfortunately
patronizing tone with boys, and could ask more questions――Pud called
them ‘fool questions’ to himself――than any one in the village of
Millville. Then, too, Pud had another reason for not caring to converse
with Mr. Tully this morning, which was that Pud had failed to attend
Sunday School three days since. Mr. Tully might not have noted the
fact, or might have forgotten it, but Pud would have preferred not
meeting the preacher.

‘Good morning, Anson,’ greeted Mr. Tully, smiling very heartily. ‘I
hope you are well this beautiful morning, my boy.’

‘Yes, sir, thanks.’ Pud returned the smile with one of guileless
sweetness and would have gone on. But Mr. Tully, beaming through his
glasses, which, as usual, leaned at a rakish angle from his long, thin
nose, continued:

‘Ah, returning from an errand to the store, doubtless.’ He glanced
approvingly at the packages. ‘Being a help to your dear parents. Yes,
yes. And how are they, my boy? Well, I trust? Your mother?’

‘Yes, sir, _she’s_ all right.’

‘Eh! You don’t mean that your father is――ah――indisposed?’

‘He got up this morning, sir,’ replied Pud.

‘Dear me! Why, I hadn’t heard! What is his trouble?’

Pud’s clear brown eyes set themselves on that far distant point that in
optics is termed infinity and assumed a sort of trance-like fixity. Had
Mr. Tully known the boy a great deal better, the peculiarity of that
gaze would have warned him.

‘The doctor,’ replied Pud, almost dreamily, ‘didn’t say.’

‘Well, well! And which doctor――But, of course, you have Doctor Timmons,
don’t you? And so Doctor Timmons didn’t know what the trouble was?’

‘Well, he didn’t say,’ answered Pud cautiously. ‘And I guess if a
doctor knows what’s the matter he’s going to tell, isn’t he, sir?’

‘Oh, undoubtedly, undoubtedly. Well, let us hope that your father’s
illness is not――ah――serious. You say he is up to-day?’

‘Yes, sir, he got up, but he didn’t go to the office.’

‘Strange that no one told me,’ marveled the preacher. ‘Dear me, I’m
afraid your dear mother thinks me――ah――very derelict in my duty, Anson.
Not that I blame her. No, no, by no manner of means. Well, I must
certainly call right away.’ Then a frown puckered Mr. Tully’s brow as
he produced a big gold watch and peered at it. ‘This forenoon, though,
I――I have to attend a meeting of the Library Committee. I had quite
forgotten it at the moment. But after dinner――yes, yes, after dinner,
most certainly. Will you bear my condolences to your parents, please,
and say that I will drop in this afternoon? I simply can’t understand
how the――ah――news of your father’s indisposition failed to reach me,
Anson. Most extraordinary, is it not, my boy?’

‘Yes, sir――no, sir――’

‘Well, well, we must all bear our trials with Christian fortitude,
Anson. A beautiful day, is it not?’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Yes, a beautiful day in a beautiful season of the year.’ Mr. Tully
inspected the sky and the trees and the sloping street, deep in
gray dust after a fortnight of rainless June weather, and smiled
approvingly. ‘Yes, a beautiful day,’ he murmured. Then, arousing
himself with a start, he patted Pud on the shoulder, beamed kindly and
strode on with quick, nervous steps.

Pud heaved a sigh of relief. Mr. Tully had not called him to task
for missing Sunday School. Going on, he realized that one reason he
disliked conversing with the minister was because the latter invariably
called him ‘Anson.’ Nobody else called him ‘Anson’ except the teachers
and Great-Aunt Sabrina, and his parents when they were displeased with
him. Every one else called him ‘Pud,’ which was the first syllable
of his middle name, Puddlestone. Until he went to school he had been
called ‘Anse.’ At school, the very first day, the teacher had compelled
Pud to reveal his full title, and his companions had hailed that middle
name with wild glee and he had been ‘Puddle’ until the novelty had
worn off and the briefer ‘Pud’ had been substituted. Puddlestone was
Great-Aunt Sabrina’s name and Pud had been named for her. She lived at
Livermore, twenty miles down the river, and, in Pud’s estimation at
least, was fabulously wealthy.

About two thirds along the next block――Pud was walking slowly and
keeping to the shade of the oaks and maples――his thoughts returned to
the conversation with Mr. Tully and he chuckled. Then the chuckle was
succeeded by an expression of doubt. Mr. Tully would be sure to call
after dinner and learn that Pud’s father had gone to Thatcher for the
day and Pud would be called on for explanations, and his explanations
didn’t do much good. Pud’s conscience didn’t trouble him a bit, for he
had told nothing but the truth to the minister, but his mother never
could be made to see the difference between telling fibs and telling
the truth as Pud sometimes told it. Pud sighed. Life was very difficult
at times!

Choosing the side gate rather than the front, Pud made his way along
the grass-grown driveway, that, flanked by ancient syringa bushes, led
to a dilapidated stable at the rear of the lot. Once, when Pud was a
very small boy, the stable had held a horse and a carriage. Now it held
nothing but rubbish and discarded furniture, and was used by none save
Pud. Pud didn’t, of course, go on to the stable. He stopped at the
little latticed porch at the back of the small white house, crossed it,
and pulled open the screen door. Mrs. Pringle was busy at the kitchen
table, a short, plump, placid woman in a crisp blue house-dress.

‘You’ve been gone a very long time, dear,’ she said as Pud entered.
‘I’ve been waiting for those lemons quite twenty minutes.’

‘Well, you just want to blame that old minister, then,’ said Pud
defensively. ‘Gee, he can talk more in ten minutes――’

‘Pud, you mustn’t speak like that about Mr. Tully. What did he talk
about?’

‘About――oh, about the weather, and you and dad, and how he was going to
call after dinner, and――’

‘Call here?’ exclaimed Mrs. Pringle. ‘Sakes alive, what for? You’re
sure he said _after_ dinner?’

‘Yes’m.’

‘Well, I wonder what he’s coming about,’ mused Pud’s mother. ‘Look in
the refrigerator, dear, and see if there’s any root beer there. Mr.
Tully is awfully fond of it.’

‘If there is,’ asked Pud, ‘can I have some, Ma?’

‘No, you cannot. There’s only a few bottles left, and with Mr. Tully
coming――’ Mrs. Pringle subsided into murmurs as she seized the
egg-beater. Pud reported three bottles on the ice and wandered out to
the porch again. From there, across a picket fence, he was confronted
by the rear end of the Daleys’ house. The Daleys’ place was very much
like the Pringles’. The house was modest in size, white with green
shutters, and placed so close to Arundel Street that fully half of
the deep lot was vacant save for a stable set close to the back
line. Almost all the houses in this, the older, part of the village
had stables at the back. Few of them were used as such nowadays,
though. Some had become garages, others, like the Pringles,’ were only
storehouses for worn-out things. But the Daleys’ stable had found a
third use. Across the front, above the wide-open carriage-room doorway,
ran a large sign of black letters on a white ground:

                             JOHN H. DALEY
                        CARPENTER & CONTRACTOR

Through the doorway Pud could see the end of a long bench, the smooth
planks lying on hanging racks above, the carpet of sweet-smelling
shavings underfoot. He could also see a stocky boy of his own age
leaning against an end of the bench and whittling something from a
piece of soft pine. The boy was hatless, and a shaft of sunlight
brought out the copper tones of his tousled hair. Pud watched rather
enviously. Tim Daley’s knife was so keen that it went into the wood as
if the latter was no more than cheese. Tim could do almost anything
with a knife, and Pud couldn’t do much more than cut himself. Tim
looked up from his occupation and straight across to the Pringles’ back
porch. The eyes of the boys met full for an instant. Then Pud swiftly
moved his gaze to the sky and Tim returned his to his knife. Then Tim
began to whistle softly. Pud heard the tune and frowned. He wanted very
much to squirm through the hole in the fence where the two pickets
were broken and spend the rest of the time before dinner over there
with Tim. And he would if only Tim would speak first. But Tim went on
whistling and whittling and Pud’s dissatisfaction with life increased.

He had to think hard to recall what he and Tim had quarreled about
yesterday afternoon and was surprised to find how small a thing it had
been. Tim had insisted that a carpenter and contractor had to know more
than a newspaper proprietor and editor, and Pud had taken the other end
of the argument. Tim, you see, had already determined to follow in his
father’s steps and Pud had already decided to become a newspaper man
like his dad. In the heat of the argument things had been said that
stung, and finally the two had parted, hurling recriminations at each
other across the fence. Already the coldness had lasted longer than
any previous breach of their friendship, and Pud was convinced that
the time for reconciliation was already past, but――and here he let the
screen door slam behind him vehemently――he’d be jiggered if he’d speak
first!

After dinner was over and he had helped his mother with the few
dishes, without, for once, having to be commanded, he sauntered
carelessly into the dining-room and from there to the parlor. For
a minute he gazed out into the shade-mottled glare of the street,
whistling loudly. Presently, though, the whistling ceased and, with a
furtive glance toward the kitchen, he eased himself noiselessly into
the hall, out the front door, and onto the porch. Then he made his way
quietly around the farther side of the house, and, keeping close to the
tangle of bushes that hid the high board fence dividing their yard from
the Kepharts’ he gained the stable door and, glancing once more toward
the kitchen, disappeared from view.

It was fairly cool in the stable until he had creakingly ascended the
narrow stairway to the loft. Up there the heat was almost discouraging.
But the sun had moved away from the end window, and, seated on a
dilapidated buggy cushion close to the casement, it was possible to
get an occasional breath of air. The loft held Pud’s most precious
belongings; his printing-press, his patent exerciser, Indian clubs,
roller skates, old games, and a valuable miscellany of treasures. This
was Pud’s _sanctum sanctorum_, his office, playroom, and harbor of
refuge. There was an unwritten law, rigidly respected by Mr. and Mrs.
Pringle, that prohibited grown-ups from ascending the stairway beyond
the turn.

Pud’s library occupied a shelf beside the window. It came very near
to being a five-foot library owing to the inclusion of all his
school-books of earlier years. Pud had inherited respect for all things
printed and could never be induced to throw away a book, no matter how
ancient or worn. There were new books as well as old ones, however,
and the new ones ran to sensational adventure. The newest of all,
which Pud, having settled himself comfortably, took from the shelf,
was ‘The Pirates of the Caribbean,’ the property, as emphatically set
forth inside the cover, of The Millville Free Public Library. For a
few moments he listened for the slam of the front gate, and then, as
Mr. Tully’s promise seemed to have been forgotten, he heaved a sigh
of relief and, sliding lower onto his spine, placed his right knee
over his left and in a jiffy was far away on tropical seas, swinging a
cutlass with the best of them!

But, although Pud didn’t know it then, Mr. Tully did call, and with the
result that when Pud’s father returned from a trip to a neighboring
town at about five o’clock, there ensued a sober conference on the
front porch in the course of which Pud’s mother said: ‘I think he
reads too many improbable stories, Anson, and sees far too many
sensational moving pictures. He ought to be outdoors more and not spend
so much of his time in the stable loft. Now that school is over, it
will be worse than ever. I do wish we could send him to a summer camp,
but that would be too expensive, I suppose.’

‘It would,’ agreed Mr. Pringle promptly and emphatically, ‘but it’s
just possible that we can think of something else, Mary. Now ...
let ... me ... see.’




                              CHAPTER II

                            FRIENDS MAKE UP


‘Oh, Tim!’

Pud, his scuffed shoes wedged between the pickets, leaned across the
fence and hailed his neighbor excitedly. But Tim, his back turned, was
propelling the lawn-mower along the edge of the grass-plot in front of
the house, and the strident chatter of the machine deafened him to the
hail. Pud took a deeper breath and tried again. This time he almost
threw himself from the fence.

‘_Tim! Tim Daley!_’

Tim heard, turned, looked, and stopped the mower.

‘Hello,’ he replied cautiously, and mopped his heated brow with the
back of his hand.

‘Say, Tim, want to go with me and be a pirate?’

‘Huh?’ Tim relinquished the handle of the mower and approached
the fence. It was evident by now that friendly relations were
re-established, and his good-looking countenance held a smile that
mingled delight with sheepishness. But Pud had forgotten for the
moment all about the recent estrangement, and as Tim drew near he went
on gleefully:

‘Want to be a pirate and sail down the river in dad’s motor-boat and
camp out at night and――’

‘Your dad hasn’t got any motor-boat,’ responded Tim.

‘He has, too! He got it last fall in trade with a fellow who owed him
some money. Don’t you remember? It’s down at Mr. Tremble’s yard. He’s
going to let me take it and go off on a trip. You’re going, too, Tim,
and we’re going to be pirates of the Caribbean! We’re going to have a
tent and a lot of food and dad’s going to have Mr. Tremble teach us to
run it!’

‘The tent?’ asked Tim puzzledly.

‘The boat, you chump! We’re going to start next Monday. Want to come?’
Pud paused anxiously.

‘Why, I guess so,’ answered Tim, ‘only I don’t know will father let me,
Pud.’

‘Why not? Why won’t he let you?’

‘He says――’ Tim hesitated at the possibility of hurting his chum’s
feelings. ‘He says you take too many risks.’

Pud stared, stricken to silence by such an outrageous accusation.
‘Risks!’ he finally ejaculated. ‘How do you mean risks? I ain’t any
riskier than――he is!’

‘Well, you know,’ answered Tim placatingly, ‘we did get in a fix last
winter on the ice that time.’

‘What of it? What’s he want to blame me for? How was I going to know
that that old hunk was going to break loose like that? Gee, you’d think
I’d done it on purpose, the way you talk!’

‘I don’t talk,’ denied Tim vigorously. ‘I only said what father said.
Anyway, if you hadn’t insisted on going out there that day we wouldn’t
have been there when it did break away. I told you it wasn’t safe.’

‘Shucks! A lot you knew about it! Besides, we got off all right, didn’t
we?’

‘Y-yes, but they had to chase us way down below the bridge, and if we’d
hit one of the piers――’

‘“If”! Well, we didn’t. Gee, if you don’t want to go, just say so. I
guess I can find some one else. Most fellows would jump at the chance
to go off a whole week in a corking boat and camp out at night and cook
their own grub and――’

‘Who’s going to cook it?’ demanded Tim.

‘Both of us. Or we could take turns. _I_ don’t mind cooking a bit.
Anyway, we’d just have bacon and easy things like that.’

‘I don’t like bacon,’ said Tim coldly.

‘Well, you wouldn’t _have_ to eat it, I guess. Gee, you can think up
more――more objections!’

‘I can’t either! Only I don’t like to cook, and if I have to do it I’d
rather not go. Couldn’t we take things that didn’t have to be cooked?’

‘Sure! That’s easy.’ Pud’s cheerfulness returned. ‘We can take things
in cans, like corn-beef and――and――’

‘Frankfurters,’ suggested Tim.

Pud scowled. ‘Gee, no, they’re awful, Tim!’

‘I like them,’ said Tim placidly. ‘And then there’s beans.’

‘Yes, beans are all right. And canned tomatoes and corn――’

‘And peaches,’ added Tim wistfully.

‘Well, I guess peaches are pretty expensive. Say, had your breakfast?’

‘Yes. You?’

Pud nodded. ‘Let’s go and ask your father if you can come with me, Tim.
Will you?’

‘He’s working on a job over across the creek,’ answered the other
doubtfully.

‘Well, why not ask him right now? We’ll both go, eh?’

Tim looked at the mower. ‘I ought to get this grass cut,’ he muttered.

‘Gosh!’ exploded Pud. ‘How long’s that going to take, I’d like to
know. You――you’re a rotten pirate!’

‘I never said I was a pirate,’ replied Tim equably. ‘But if father
comes home and finds I haven’t cut the grass he will be madder’n a
hornet.’

‘That’s all right. When we come back I’ll get our mower and help you.’

Tim considered and finally agreed, and a minute later they were going
side by side along Arundel Street. ‘How’d your father come to say you
could do it?’ asked Tim.

‘He and ma think I ought to be outdoors more,’ replied Pud evasively.
Tim was about to seek further enlightenment when Pud suddenly stopped
short.

‘Gee!’ he exclaimed. ‘There’s Harmon Johnson!’

‘What of it?’ demanded Tim, pulling away from his friend’s clutching
fingers.

‘What of it! Why, don’t you see?’ Pud’s voice, lowered to a hoarse
whisper, was exultant. ‘Pirates always have a black man to cook for
’em. We’ll get Harmon to come along!’

‘No, we won’t either! I’m not going to sleep with any negro!’

‘Who’s asking you to sleep with him?’ inquired Pud impatiently. ‘He can
sleep outside, can’t he? And he can do all the cooking and wash the
dishes and――and everything.’

‘How do you know he can cook?’

‘All colored folks can cook. Anyway, I guess he can do it as well as
you or I can.’

‘Yes, that’s so.’

The object of their remarks approached unhurriedly. He was a year
younger than Pud and Tim, but he looked older. He was very black, with
a round and solemn countenance and a broad-shouldered, sturdy body. His
father worked in the chair factory and his mother was locally famed as
a laundress of more than ordinary skill. They lived in Logtown, the
community of cabins clustered along the nearer bank of Town Creek.
Harmon when not in school worked variously as delivery boy, messenger,
assistant washer at Floyd’s Garage and chore-boy for any one who
required his services. Just now, shuffling along on dusty bare feet, he
appeared to be out of employment.

‘Hello, Harmon,’ greeted Pud genially.

‘Hello,’ returned Harmon, coming to a halt in front of them and resting
a gravely questioning gaze on Pud.

‘Say, Harmon, want to go on a cruise in a motor-boat with us?’

Harmon nodded unemotionally. He didn’t know what Pud meant, but it
sounded as though there might be a quarter or maybe a half-dollar in
it. ‘When you-all want me to do it?’ he inquired.

‘We’re going to start next Monday,’ replied Pud importantly.

Harmon nodded again and started on. ‘I reckon I can ’tend to it for
you,’ he assured them. ‘I usually gets half a dollar,’ he added.

‘Hold on! You don’t understand, Harmon. You――you don’t get anything for
it.’

‘How-come?’ Harmon looked slightly derisive.

Pud, assisted by Tim, explained at length and with great detail that
this was not a business matter, that, on the contrary, they were
proposing to allow Harmon to share in a whole week of idle enjoyment,
with plenty to eat and nothing to do――much.

‘Who cooks all these rations you tell about?’ asked the darky at last.

‘Why――’ Pud’s gaze wandered to the distant horizon――‘any of us. You
could if you liked, Harmon.’

Harmon wiggled five toes against the dirt and observed them
thoughtfully. Pud and Tim exchanged anxious glances.

‘I get my meals for nothin’, don’ I?’ Harmon inquired.

‘Sure! And a bed to sleep in――that is, a――a place to sleep; and
nothing to do but have a good time!’

Harmon’s face lighted slowly and two rows of white teeth flashed. ‘Can
I run the boat sometimes?’ he asked.

‘Of course you can,’ said Pud magnanimously. ‘And steer it, too.’

‘All right,’ decided Harmon. ‘You tell me when you want me an’ I’ll be
there.’

‘That’s fine,’ declared Tim, ‘but what about your father, Harmon? Or
your mother? Think they’ll let you go?’

Harmon nodded untroubledly. ‘Boun’ to,’ he said.

The boys continued their journey elatedly. ‘I didn’t say anything about
being pirates,’ explained Pud, ‘because I didn’t want to scare him.
Maybe he wouldn’t want to go if he knew. Darkies are awfully scarey,
you know.’

‘Say, wait a minute,’ exclaimed Tim suspiciously. ‘What’s all this
about being pirates? What do you mean pirates?’

‘Why, you know what a pirate is, don’t you?’ replied Pud evasively.

‘Sure, but there aren’t any pirates these days, so how can we be them?’

‘Aren’t any pirates, eh?’ said Pud derisively. ‘I guess you don’t know
much about them. Didn’t you ever hear of river pirates?’

Tim shook his head. ‘I’ve heard of oyster pirates.’

‘Huh, they ain’t real pirates. River pirates are just like the pirates
of the Caribbean. That’s what we’re going to be.’

‘What do we do?’ asked Tim uneasily.

‘Why, we――well, we just be pirates! Of course we don’t murder folks,
but we――we do other things.’

‘Such as what?’ persisted his chum.

‘Well――’ Pud’s gaze became far-away and sort of glassy. ‘Maybe we’ll
sack a town and carry off its treasures. And board a merchant craft and
capture her. And hang the captain to the――’

‘Rats!’ said Tim. ‘You can’t hang a man without murdering him, can you?
All right, I’ll be a pirate of the Cabirean, just as long as it’s only
play――’

‘Caribbean, you idiot. And it isn’t only play, either. At least,
not――well, you never know what’s going to happen!’ And Pud stared
darkly into the muddy waters of Town Creek as they tramped across the
footbridge.

Mr. Daley was surprisingly complaisant when they found him. He was a
tall, large-boned man with only a trace of the Irish in features and
talk. He stopped planing down the edge of a board while Tim and Pud
explained the nature of their errand and observed them with deep-set,
kindly gray eyes. ‘Why, now,’ he said at last, ‘it’s mighty kind of
your father, Pud, and I guess Tim would enjoy it fine. You’d be gone no
more’n a week, eh? Well, I’ll be missing the boy, but that’s nothing if
he wants to go. But I’m warning you fair, Tim, if you get drowned, I’ll
whale the life out of you so soon’s I get my hands on you!’

Back at Tim’s house, they set to work on the lawn and the side yard,
and for nearly an hour the two mowers droned in the hot sunlight of
mid-forenoon. At last the work was done and the machines put away and
the boys found a shaded spot under a big maple in Tim’s yard and went
to planning. Tim’s enthusiasm was now equal quite to Pud’s as, pencil
in hand, he set down item after item on a short length of clean white
pine board.

‘Golly,’ he said, having corrected ‘beens’ to ‘beans’ at the bottom of
the long list, ‘I wish we were going to-morrow, Pud, instead of Monday!’

‘So do I.’ Pud’s tone held an emphasis that brought an inquiring look
from his companion. ‘I’ve got to do a lot of work before Monday,’ Pud
sighed. ‘You see――say, I didn’t tell you about Mr. Tully, the Baptist
minister, did I? That was yesterday, and――and I didn’t see you
yesterday,’ Pud ended hastily.

‘What about him?’ demanded Tim eagerly.

So Pud narrated the event and its results, Tim chuckling wickedly at
times. The finish of the tale held little of humor, though. ‘Dad gave
me fits,’ said Pud moodily. ‘Made me promise not to do it again and
said I had to apologize to Mr. Tully.’

‘Did you?’ inquired Tim interestedly.

Pud shook his head. ‘Not yet. I’m going to after dinner.’

‘Oh, that isn’t so bad.’

‘But that isn’t all of it,’ responded the other sadly. ‘I’ve got
to go to dad’s office to-morrow and Saturday and help fold a lot
of circulars; ’most four thousand of them. He said that was for
punishment. Gee, I hate folding circulars!’

‘Four thousand!’ Tim whistled expressively. ‘You got to do them all?’

‘No, I don’t suppose so. He said I was to help Jimmy, one of the men in
the shop. But I’ll bet I’ll have to do most of ’em!’

‘And that’s why we can’t start till Monday?’

‘Yes. And if they aren’t all done, we can’t get going even then!’

There was silence under the elm. Then Tim asked: ‘Is it hard? Folding
circulars, I mean.’

‘No, it ain’t hard,’ answered Pud despondently, ‘but it’s awful
monotonous. You just fold ’em so’――he illustrated sketchily――‘and
crease ’em with a wooden ruler, so’――a second illustration――‘and then
you do it again, and that’s all.’

‘Could I do it, Pud?’

Pud looked across swiftly, his brown eyes lighting as if they saw a
wonderful vision. ‘Sure!’ he cried.

‘All right, then,’ said Tim, ‘I’ll help you.’

Pud nodded radiantly. Then his face sobered and his gaze dropped and
another silence held for a moment. Finally, ‘Say, Tim,’ he muttered, ‘I
guess maybe I was wrong the other day about you having to know more to
be an editor than to be a contractor.’

‘Oh, shut up,’ said Tim testily. ‘You weren’t either. What’ll I put
down after “beans”?’




                              CHAPTER III

                    THE KISMET STARTS ON HER VOYAGE


‘Shove her off there!’

The captain of the launch _Kismet_ gave the order in a fine, gruff,
sailor-like voice as he pulled the throttle a trifle wider. The
deck-hand, seated on the edge of the scanty after deck, set two bare
feet against the float and pushed hard. The mate gripped the wheel
tightly, fixed anxious blue eyes on the stern of a lumber schooner
fully ten fathoms away and hoped for the best. The launch’s nose swung
slowly into the stream, the captain pulled back on the clutch lever
and there ensued a clattering, jarring noise that caused the deck-hand
very nearly to lose his balance and go overboard. Then the alarming
sounds ceased and the _Kismet_ lurched forward. The mate saw, with
vast relief, that a collision with the schooner was averted――by the
narrow margin of some forty feet――and dared a backward look at the dock
where his father and Pud’s father and bow-legged Andy Tremble were
gathered to see them off. They were waving and calling, and Tim waved
and shouted back. So did Pud. Harmon only showed a flash of white
teeth. There was no one there to say good-bye to Harmon, but he didn’t
seem to mind. The launch straightened out in the middle of the river
and pointed her bow for the bridge. The figures on the boat-yard float
receded and were presently lost to sight. Captain and mate exchanged a
look of triumph. The voyage had begun!

Presently there ensued an anxious period when, the little two-cylinder
engine throttled down and Pud and Tim both at the wheel, the _Kismet_
negotiated the passage under the long bridge. The space looked
alarmingly narrow as they approached, but once in the shadows of the
ancient timbers there was room and to spare on each side, and almost
nonchalantly Pud opened her up again. As they passed again into the
sunlight Gus Miller’s station jitney rattled across and Gus waved
down to them. Pud returned the salutation with all the dignity of the
captain of an ocean liner waving from her bridge. The railroad station
went slowly astern and a long line of box cars on the siding followed.
The water tower on Coop’s Hill was all that remained in view of
Millville now. On their left a red clay bank arose to the edge of the
meadows. On their right trees and bushes marched straight down to the
gently flowing water. Pud gave a sigh of great contentment.

‘Some little craft, Tim,’ he said.

‘Sure is,’ agreed Tim. ‘Say, it ain’t hard to steer, is it, when you
get used to it?’

‘N-no, not here,’ answered Pud, ‘but you wait till she gets in a sea!’

‘How do you mean sea?’ asked Tim anxiously. ‘Where are we going to get
in any sea?’

‘Well, I guess this old river can kick up pretty mean lower down,’ said
Pud. ‘Take it around Mumford, Tim, and it’s ’most a mile wide.’

‘Mumford! Gosh, we ain’t going that far. Why Mumford’s forty miles,
pretty near, by river.’

‘What of it? This old cruiser’s doing five miles right now, I guess,
and it would only take us eight hours to get to Mumford, wouldn’t it?
Why, we could get as far as that to-day if we wanted to!’

‘Well, but you said we were going to just cruise and take it easy. You
said we’d go up Fox River a way and explore. You didn’t say anything
about Mumford, and I’ll tell you right now I ain’t going to take any
chances!’

‘Pshaw, who’s asking you to? Why, this boat’s a mighty safe old craft,
I tell you. I guess I wouldn’t be afraid to go right out into the sound
in her.’

‘Well, you can go alone,’ answered Tim decidedly. ‘When you get ready
to do that, just you dump me and Harmon ashore.’

‘I’ll bet Harmon wouldn’t be scared to go, would you, Harmon?’

‘Where’s ’at?’ asked the darky, who, since leaving the float, had been
watching the engine in grave fascination.

‘Out in the sound. You wouldn’t be afraid, would you?’

‘What kind o’ sound?’

‘Why, the ocean down at the mouth of the river.’

‘I ain’ never heerd no sound yet I’s scared of,’ replied Harmon calmly.

Tim laughed. Pud, about to make the matter clear, was interrupted by
a sudden grinding and thumping from aft the engine and hurried off.
When you put the clutch lever back on the _Kismet_, you had to engage
it with a little wire hook or else it slipped back into neutral. Pud
knew this, but in the excitement of getting away had forgotten it. Now
he remedied the matter and returned to the bow, but not to the recent
subject of discourse. A man fishing from a flat-bottomed punt just
ahead and a few yards from the shore claimed his interest. To see if
the man had had any luck, Pud turned the launch toward the punt.

‘Catching anything?’ he called as the _Kismet_ waddled past a few yards
distant.

A red and irate countenance turned toward them and the disciple of
Izaak Walton gestured fiercely with the hand that wasn’t busy with his
pole. ‘You consarned whippersnappers,’ he yelled, ‘ain’t you got no
sense at all? What do you mean acomin’ over here and scarin’ all the
fish away? If I had ahold of you a minute I’d teach you some sense, you
dog-gone, low-down trash! I’d show you who was catchin’ anythin’! I’d
plumb wear you out, dod-bust you! I’d――’

The _Kismet_ passed from hearing, but back up the stream the angry
gentleman still shook his fist at them. Pud and Tim looked a bit
chastened, but the usually solemn Harmon was doubled over with mirth.

‘Yeah, yeah!’ he gurgled. ‘Old Mister Man certainly was talkin’ fine!
Lawsy, lawsy! My golly, wan’t he angrified?’

‘Huh,’ said Pud, ‘I don’t believe he ever caught anything there,
anyway, the old grouch!’

After a minute Tim asked wistfully: ‘Where do we stop for dinner, Pud?’

‘Dinner? Gee, it’s only a little after ten! Didn’t you eat any
breakfast?’

‘Not much,’ acknowledged Tim. ‘I guess I was too excited.’

‘Hm, well, I guess I was, too. Just the same, we hadn’t ought to have
dinner before twelve; or, maybe, half-past eleven.’

‘N-no, but thinking about it sort of helps,’ murmured Tim.

It got pretty warm on the river as the sun moved toward the zenith and
both Pud and Tim began to look longingly at the occasional shady places
they passed. Harmon lay flat on his back on the stern seat, one bare
black arm across his eyes, utterly motionless, silent and contented.
They chugged past Farquhar’s Landing with its half-dozen scattered
houses and gazed back regretfully at the broad oaks that lined the
single street. Ahead of them lay a long stretch of open stream,
sun-smitten, its banks barren of shade. Pud consulted his silver watch
and announced casually: ‘’Most quarter-past eleven. Guess we might as
well stop at the next place that looks good, Tim. Won’t do to overheat
the engine.’

‘What about me getting overheated?’ grumbled Tim. ‘Anyway, there isn’t
any place in sight, and by the time we get to one, I’ll be fried as
hard as an egg.’

‘I guess it isn’t any hotter for you than it is for me,’ said Pud.
‘Looks like there were trees down beyond that bend, don’t it?’

Tim agreed that it did sort of look that way, and a quarter of an
hour later the _Kismet_ sidled up to the shore at the right where
a straggling grove of trees had taken possession of one corner of
a field. Although the launch drew only about eighteen inches, they
couldn’t get her nose close enough to land dry-shod, and so Harmon
waded ashore with the bowline and made it fast to the bole of a willow.
Then he pushed a log out toward the launch and Tim got ashore on it
without wetting more than one foot slightly. It was decided to be
much too hot to do any cooking, so Pud selected a box of crackers, a
can of potted ham, six bananas, and three bottles of lemon tonic from
the larder and carefully tossed the articles one by one across the
intervening space of mud and water to Tim. Everything got over safely
except one of the bottles, and Harmon rescued that. Having turned off
the gasoline at the tank according to instructions from Andy Tremble,
Pud set out to join the others. Perhaps the current had slightly
misplaced the log. Anyhow, Pud felt the water creeping about one ankle,
gave a startled exclamation and advanced his other foot hurriedly with
the result that he stepped on the side of the log and――Oh, well, what
finally happened was that Pud sat squarely down in three inches of
water!

To his credit it is here related that he didn’t get angry. After
an instant of surprise and dismay, he accepted the misadventure as
an excellent joke and laughed so hard that it required aid from
the grinning Tim to get him to his feet. Harmon was rolling about
on the ground, convulsed with joy. Laughter cleared the atmosphere
considerably. The heat on the river had commenced to make both Pud
and Tim somewhat testy. Pud ate his lunch with no more on than his
underclothes. The costume was sufficient for the occasion, and Tim
envied him until the mosquitoes learned of their arrival and kept Pud
so busy slapping that he scarcely had time to eat. Things tasted pretty
good, although the tonic would have been more satisfying if it hadn’t
been rather more than lukewarm. When the none too hearty repast was
finished to the last crumb, Harmon was dispatched first to the launch
for the lard-pail that was to do duty as a water bucket and then up
the hill in the hot noonday sunshine in search of a well or a spring.
The river water was too warm to drink. When Harmon had uncomplainingly
departed, the others provided themselves with branches with which to
fight the mosquitoes and made themselves comfortable. A few yards away
the launch rubbed her sides against a snag and looked, as Pud proudly
observed, ‘pretty good.’

The _Kismet_ was twenty-and-a-half feet long and six feet wide,
proportions that made less for speed than comfort and safety. She was
open all the way from her short forward deck to her even shorter after
deck. The engine was placed amidship. A seat extended across the stern
and along either side. Two folding canvas stools were also provided.
The seats had lockers under them, and there was a locker beneath the
stern decking and a space at the bow pretty much taken up by the
gasoline tank. The _Kismet_ had been painted buff to the water-line
and white above it, but the white had long since turned to drab. There
hadn’t been time to repaint the launch, even had Mr. Pringle decided
to go to the expense. All that Andy Tremble, in whose boat-yard the
_Kismet_ had lain since the previous fall, had been able to do was use
a scrubbing brush on the paint and varnish and overhaul the engine.
The latter badly needed a coat of enamel, but in lieu of that Andy had
doused it well with cylinder oil, and for quite three days it looked
fairly decent. After that it went back to its former hues of rusty red
and yellow.

The lockers were all filled to capacity, for both Pud and Tim had found
it necessary to take along a great many things not usually considered
essential to such a voyage. Harmon alone had arrived in light marching
order, his effects consisting principally of a blue cotton shirt and
a mouth-organ. Mrs. Pringle had censored the boys’ list of rations
with a stern hand, and when she had finished Pud had voiced the dismal
prophecy that he and Tim――not to mention Harmon――would undoubtedly
starve to death long before the week was up. Mrs. Pringle had supplied
the larder with essentials only, although at the last moment she had
consented to two dozen bottles of tonic and had added a cake of her
own baking. Pud had supplied a dozen bananas and Tim had thoughtfully
bought five bars of chocolate not too generously studded with almonds.
Mr. Pringle had dug out his camping outfit in the garret: an ‘A’ tent,
slightly mildewed but whole, two folding canvas cots, a folding stove,
an aluminum cooking-kit, and a carbide lantern, and Mrs. Pringle had
provided blankets, towels, a great deal more soap than Pud considered
necessary, several tin plates and cups and various other impedimenta.
Pud and Tim had each taken a change of clothes, swimming trunks, a
sweater, and a rubber coat; and at the last moment Tim had scurried
home to get a gray flannel shirt!

Both boys had taken a wealth of fishing paraphernalia, including a can
of worms; Pud had put in his camera; Tim had bought a baseball and
catcher’s mitten; Pud had provided an ancient musket that had lain in
the attic for many years and hadn’t been used for nearly a century; Tim
had fetched almost a complete set of tools selected from his father’s
discarded implements; and there were numerous other items besides,
many of which never emerged from the lockers until the _Kismet_ was
back in her home port. One of such was an automobile horn that Tim had
traded for with Lee Stiles, Egbert Stiles’s cousin. It made a perfectly
glorious howl when you punched down on it, and Tim thought it would be
a fine thing to mount it on the launch’s bow and blow it when they met
other boats, but he forgot all about it afterward.

All these things severely taxed the capacity of the storage space. In
fact, the tent and the cots and the cooking-utensils, which lived in a
canvas bag when not in use, had to lie in the forward compartment and
were forever being stumbled over. So, too, with the box of tonic and a
peck of potatoes in a paper sack, neither of which would accommodate
themselves to a locker. After the first rain the potatoes burst the
sack and it became one of Harmon’s daily duties to rout them out from
unexpected places and herd them together again. There was, also, a
boat-hook which seemed to have no real home and which was always
lying on the floor where you could easiest put an unwary foot on it.
After Pud and Tim had each narrowly escaped broken limbs as a result
of stepping on the pesky thing and Pud had exasperatedly threatened to
heave it overboard, Harmon cleverly solved the difficulty by tying a
line to it and dropping it over the side. There were times when they
might have made use of it if it had been handy, but it wasn’t and they
got on very nicely without it.

I think that’s all the description the _Kismet_ merits. Perhaps I
should add that an empty flagpole leaned rakishly from a brass socket
at the stern and that the boat’s name, done in black letters, could
still be plainly read on each side of the bow. So much, then, for the
craft, and now let us return to the crew.




                              CHAPTER IV

                    UNDER THE SKULL-AND-CROSS-BONES


‘I wish he’d hurry up with that water,’ muttered Tim, his hands under
his head, his straw hat pulled over his forehead, and the rest of his
countenance obscured by the wilted leaves of the maple branch which
he had thrust between the buttons of his shirt. Pud, cross-legged,
a grass-blade between his teeth and a ruminative look on his face,
answered absently,

‘Maybe he will.’

It was getting along toward one o’clock now, and thrice they had had
to shift their positions to keep the tree boughs between them and
the glowing sun. There was a faint breath of air creeping down the
long green slope behind them which to some extent made existence more
bearable. At least, it gave them a slight advantage over the mosquitoes.

‘How far do you think we’ve come?’ asked Tim after a minute of silence.

Pud aroused himself from his abstraction and uncrossed his cramped legs.

‘Let’s see, Farquhar’s is eight miles, isn’t it? And I guess we’re
a couple of miles beyond that. Say, ten miles in an hour and three
quarters is going some, Tim! Why, we must have made six miles an hour,
and Mr. Tremble said she wouldn’t do better than five!’

‘Well, don’t you suppose the current helped some?’

‘Gee, that’s so. Maybe it did, though it isn’t very strong. Yes, I
guess it must have.’

‘How much farther do you think we’ll go to-day?’ Tim sounded sleepy.

‘Oh, I guess we’ll make the railroad bridge at Livermore,’ responded
Pud a trifle uncertainly. ‘That’s only about another ten miles, and I
dare say there’ll be a good camping-place there.’

‘You ever been there?’

‘Sure.’

‘By river, I mean.’

‘No, not by river. I’ve never been beyond Farquhar’s by river, but I’ve
been to Livermore by train.’

‘We’d ought to have a map,’ murmured Tim.

‘What for? You can’t get lost on a river, can you?’

‘Well, they say you can get lost on Fox River. They say it sort of runs
around in circles, and there’s a lot of branches and creeks too.’

‘You can’t get lost on any river,’ answered Pud decisively, ‘because
all you’ve got to do is follow the current and you’ll come out of it.’

‘Yeah, that’s so,’ agreed Tim. ‘Just the same, I heard Father tell once
how a couple of Revenue men went up there to Swamp Hole and were lost
’most a week.’

‘Must have got into the woods, or the swamp then. Say, I guess that’s a
wild place, eh?’

‘The Hole? Gosh, I wouldn’t go near that place for a million dollars!’

‘I would,’ said Pud promptly. ‘I’d like mighty well to see what it’s
like, wouldn’t you? If you could get there without being seen, eh?’

But Tim shook his head. ‘No, sir, I wouldn’t. I guess the folks that
live there would just as soon cut your throat as say “Howdy.” They say
there’s folks living in Swamp Hole that ain’t ever been outside it,
Pud.’

‘I guess a lot of ’em wouldn’t dare come out,’ chuckled Pud, ‘for fear
the sheriff would get ’em. I’m going to see if my clothes are dry.’

‘Going to put them on?’

‘Yes. Why?’

‘I was thinking we might go in swimming.’

‘Gee, why not? Want to?’ Tim assented. ‘All right, I’ll get the trunks.’

Pud waded out to the launch, climbed aboard and began hunting through
the lockers. It took him a long time to find the articles, for,
although when they had stored their belongings away, they had been
quite certain they could put their hands on them again instantly, now
he couldn’t remember where a single thing was! When he had pulled most
of the dunnage from one side of the boat, he was hot but triumphant and
splashed back to shore with the bathing-trunks just as Harmon ambled
into sight. The thought of a drink of cold water was so welcome that he
didn’t say a word about the time it had taken Harmon to do the errand.
But when he had taken one gulp of the contents of the lard-pail he
found his voice.

‘For goodness’ sake,’ he exclaimed disgustedly, ‘where’d you get that
stuff? It’s as warm as――as dish water!’

‘Oh, gosh!’ moaned Tim. ‘Ain’t it any good, Pud?’

‘Well, you can drink it if you like. I won’t. He never got that out of
any well, I’ll bet!’

‘I did, too,’ declared Harmon. ‘I got it out of a gentleman that lives
in a big white house’s well. It was gran’ and col’, too, but I reckon
it done got warmed up luggin’ it back here, ’cause it’s mos’ of two
miles.’

‘Two miles! Gee!’ Pud looked from the pail to Harmon. ‘Well, I guess if
you went two miles for it, we oughtn’t to kick. Just the same, it’s
too warm to drink. And my throat’s as dry as――as――’

‘So’s mine,’ said Tim.

‘If you-all wants some col’ water,’ announced Harmon, ‘I’ll get you
plenty of it.’

‘Where?’ asked Pud.

Harmon pointed to the bank of the river. ‘Right yonder. I got to have
me a shovel, though.’

‘Gee, that’s so. I never thought of that, Tim. All we’ve got to do is
dig a hole back from the river a bit and let it fill up. But we haven’t
any shovel!’

‘That’s a fact,’ owned Tim. ‘And I thought we’d fetched everything we’d
need, too!’

Harmon, though, was resourceful, for, lacking a shovel, he used a large
iron spoon and, selecting a spot half a dozen feet from the edge of the
water, soon had a hole dug. Anxiously, their tongues almost hanging
out, the others watched the operation. From all sides of the tiny well
water trickled in, but Tim viewed the muddy result distastefully.
‘Gosh,’ he said, ‘I wouldn’t drink that stuff! Why, it might poison me!’

‘Hold your horses,’ advised Pud. ‘Wait till it settles.’

Harmon, though, baled out most of the first lot very carefully. Then
the hole was allowed to fill once more, and while it settled, Pud and
Tim got into their swimming-trunks. By the time they were ready for the
river, Harmon announced the water ready for drinking. He had got a tin
cup from the launch and now he dipped it into the little reservoir and
offered it to Tim. Tim looked at it, smelled it, and finally tasted it.
Then he drank it at two gulps.

‘Gosh,’ he said, ‘that’s great! Cold, too!’

Well, it wasn’t exactly cold, but it was cool, and it was clear and
sweet, and Harmon gravely filled the cup many times before their
thirsts were satisfied. Then they went in swimming. Harmon had brought
no bathing attire, but that trifling circumstance didn’t keep him out
of the water, and long after Pud and Tim had had enough and were out
again on the grass, sunning themselves dry, Harmon still paddled or
floated idly about, the sunlight glinting on the wet ebony of his skin.

Having donned some of his clothes, Pud, invigorated by his bath, said
he guessed it was time to fix up the launch. Tim wanted to know what
he meant by ‘fix up’ and was requested to wait and see. Pud climbed
into the launch, rummaged awhile and reappeared to view with two
pieces of white oilcloth. Then he set about tacking one of them on the
bow. Tim advanced to the edge of the water and watched curiously. The
oblong of oilcloth, evidently cut from a piece that had seen service
on Mrs. Pringle’s kitchen table, was adorned with the inscription,
surprisingly well lettered in black paint, JOLLY RODGER. Several tacks
and several whacks of the hammer secured the strip of oilcloth over the
word _Kismet_, and, since the oilcloth was not particularly white any
longer, at a distance of a few yards it appeared quite as though the
new name was painted on the hull.

‘How’s it look?’ demanded Pud triumphantly as he sent the last tack
home and raised a flushed countenance to Tim.

‘All right,’ answered the other doubtfully, ‘only――’

‘Only what?’

‘I never saw “Roger” spelled with a “d,” Pud.’

‘Why not? R-o-d, Rod, g-e-r, ger; Rodger. Isn’t that right?’

Tim shook his head. ‘There isn’t any “d,” Pud.’

Pud scratched his bare head sheepishly. Then he grinned. ‘Oh, well,
what’s the diff? I guess lots of pirates didn’t spell any better than I
do! Look, here’s the one for the other side.’ He held up a second strip
of oilcloth and Tim read VENGANCE. This time he didn’t have the heart
to correct the spelling.

‘Fine,’ he said, ‘but what’s the idea of having different names?’

‘Well, I couldn’t decide which was the best. Besides, Tim, maybe it’ll
confuse the enemy.’

‘Sure,’ agreed the other gravely.

Harmon watched operations in solemn, uncomprehending silence,
noiselessly spelling the word out. Pud’s hammer tap-tapped for a
minute and then there was nothing left to inform the beholder that
this apparently piratical craft was in fact only the hitherto entirely
respectable _Kismet_. But Pud wasn’t through even yet. Next appeared
what looked to have been part of a pillow-slip. This was decorated with
a skull-and-cross-bones, none too successfully executed since the paint
had run rather badly in places. It took Pud quite five minutes to get
the thing tacked to the flagpole, and then, tossing down his hammer,
he waded back to shore and stood for an equal length of time in rapt
contemplation of the improvements. There wasn’t nearly enough breeze
blowing to display the gruesome emblem on the flag, but Pud seemed
thoroughly satisfied, and even Tim was thrilled a little by the wicked
appearance of the transformed launch. As for Harmon, curiosity at last
got the better of him.

‘What ’at flag for?’ he asked.

‘That’s the pirate’s flag,’ Pud informed him. ‘We’re going to be
pirates, Harmon.’

‘Uh-huh. How we gets to be ’em?’

Pud winked at Tim and answered gravely: ‘Oh, we kill folks and rob
them, you know; run them down and scuttle their ships and cut off their
heads and――’

You never could tell beforehand, it seemed, what would touch off
Harmon’s peculiar sense of humor. Now he dropped suddenly to the
grass and writhed in uproarious delight. His teeth flashed and his
eyes rolled and his bare heels beat a wild tattoo on the turf. For
an instant the others were too surprised to do anything save stare.
Pud, indeed, was a trifle chagrined that his explanation had failed to
impress Harmon as he had meant it to. But there was no resisting the
contagion of that laughter, and after a moment they joined in, their
amusement occasioned, though, solely by Harmon’s ridiculous antics.
Harmon ceased almost as suddenly as he had begun and sat up, supported
by widespread hands, and viewed them gravely. Pud conquered his mirth
and demanded sternly:

‘For goodness’ sake, what’s the matter with you, I’d like to know?
What’s funny about killing folks?’

Harmon was threatened with a relapse, but resisted it successfully. He
only rolled his eyes a little as he giggled: ‘Ain’ nothin’. I jus’
laugh at the way you done tell it!’

And that was the nearest to an explanation he was capable of. Pud said
‘Humph!’ doubtfully. Then he added darkly: ‘All right, but I guess you
won’t think it’s so funny when we get to pirating right!’

Harmon accepted the rebuke docilely and without comment, and wandered
away along the river. ‘He’s crazy,’ muttered Pud, still slightly
indignant. But when he met Tim’s twinkling eyes, he had to smile again.
They sat down once more in the shade and watched the ripples on the
water and talked fitfully. After a while Pud looked at his watch.
‘Gee,’ he said, ‘it’s twenty past three!’

‘Gosh,’ murmured Tim, ‘is it?’

‘Yes.’

Then silence fell again between them. A kingfisher called stridently
from the limb of a dead pine across the river and a fish broke the
water with a splash. Then Harmon returned with his arms full of dry
branches which he dropped noisily near by.

Pud sat up and stared inquiringly. ‘What’s that for?’ he asked.

‘Fire,’ answered Harmon. ‘Ain’ you-all goin’ to have no supper?’

‘Sure, but we’re not going to have it here, you chump. At least’――he
looked doubtfully at Tim――‘I don’t suppose we are.’

Tim viewed the firewood, the sky, the river, and then Pud. ‘Well, I
don’t know,’ he answered slowly. ‘This isn’t such a bad place, is it?’

‘N-no, it ain’t. We could put the tent up over there; and we’ve got
drinking water handy. I’m willing if you are.’ Tim nodded lazily. ‘All
right, Harmon, we’ll stay――’

But Harmon had gone again. Pud settled back and laid an arm over his
eyes.

It was nearly five when he woke up. There was sound of faint, elfin
music in his ears, and for a moment he couldn’t think where he was.
Then his drowsy eyes fell on the slumbering Tim a yard away, journeyed
on and encountered, seated on the fallen trunk of a tree beside the
river, the gently swaying form of Harmon, his mouth-organ at his lips.
It was cooler now, for the sun was sinking toward the rim of distant
forest and a little breeze ruffled the water. Pud yawned, stretched,
sat up and shook Tim into wakefulness.

They were very busy for a while, for all sorts of things had to be
transported from launch to land; cooking outfit, food, tent, cots, and
a dozen other things at least. By six, Harmon, spurning the intricate
camp stove they had brought, had a fire going between two dead logs
and had begun the preparation of the evening meal. Pud and Tim, seated
near by, watched anxiously. As a cook Harmon was still an unknown
quantity. But their anxiety didn’t last long. Harmon didn’t know how
to cook many things, but within his limitations he was a master. The
dexterous way in which he cracked the eggs on the rim of the fry-pan
without losing a drop of their contents and then deposited the
unseparated yolks and whites in exactly the right place in the sizzling
grease brought a sigh of relief from Pud and an anticipatory gleam into
Tim’s blue eyes. After that they both ceased offering suggestions to
the chef and just leaned back on their elbows and waited.

They called it supper, but it had all the indications of dinner.
There were bacon and eggs and baked beans and bread and butter and
tea and bananas and cake. They didn’t need the bananas, perhaps, but
Tim pointed out the undeniable fact that they were getting pretty
soft and so they ate them to save them. After such a repast the
job of putting up the tent didn’t appeal to them, but it had to be
performed. And there was no use of waiting for assistance from Harmon,
either, for Harmon had plenty to do in washing up the dishes. So,
rather half-heartedly and with many protesting groans, they set about
their task. Of course the guy-ropes were snarled and knotted, just
as guy-ropes always are, and there were four pegs missing, and the
ridgepole didn’t want to fit onto the uprights. But they conquered in
the end, and set the two cots up inside――although not before Tim had
squeezed a finger painfully in the process――and made their beds. When
they were done it was still daylight, although the sun was resting on
the tips of the far-off pines. They cut some branches for Harmon and
laid them on the ground at a short distance from the tent and then
spread a blanket over them. Harmon, through with his duties, looked on
rather dubiously.

‘’Spose a bear come along an’ eat me,’ he suggested finally.

‘There aren’t any bears around here,’ said Pud reassuringly. ‘Besides,
all you’ve got to do is yell.’

‘Yes, sir, I sure goin’ do ’at,’ he answered convincingly.

At sunset the breeze died down and the mosquitoes became troublesome
once more. So they built up the fire and smudged it with green branches
and damp wood and sat to leeward――when there was any leeward――and
watched the light fade in the west and the river turn from copper to
steel and finally become lost to sight in the darkness. By request
Harmon pulled his mouth-organ out of his trousers pocket and played
his entire programme. The music cheered them up somewhat. Harmon could
certainly make the instrument behave, as Pud phrased it! After that
Pud introduced the subject of pirates and, his memory still fresh from
his reading, told them weird and blood-thirsty tales that made even
the narrator himself glance uneasily over his shoulder at intervals.
Oddly enough, Harmon seemed utterly unaffected as to nerves. When Pud
paused, the darky, staring round-eyed across the fire, begged for more.
The more sanguinary the tales the better Harmon liked them, and when
the cutlasses flew fastest and blood filled the scuppers, he voiced
awed applause in murmured ‘Lawsies!’ or ‘My gollies!’ It was plain to
be seen that Harmon was a born pirate! Indeed, it seemed regrettable
that Morgan had lived too early to have the services of such a boon
companion and kindred soul as Harmon Johnson!

‘When we-all goin’ start this here piratin’, Mister Pud?’ he asked
finally.

‘Oh, maybe to-morrow,’ replied Pud, suppressing a yawn.

‘Uh-huh. Reckon we’s goin’ sack a town, ain’ we?’

‘Well, we’ve got to find the town first,’ chuckled Tim.

‘Sure has,’ agreed Harmon cheerfully. ‘I goin’ sharpen up ’at ol’
carvin’ knife to-morrow. Yes, sir, I goin’ put a aidge on ’at ol’
knife for sure! I ain’ needin’ no cutluss, Mister Tim, if I got me a
good knife!’ And Harmon swished an imaginary blade in a startlingly
realistic manner.

‘Guess you’d better go to bed,’ growled Pud. ‘And if I catch you
sharpening any knives around here I’ll skin you!’

Harmon accepted the rebuke meekly, although he was possibly slightly
puzzled by it, and flashlights were snapped on and they sought their
couches. Tim wanted to light the carbide lamp, but Pud said it would
attract the mosquitoes, and so they did without it. After they were
in bed and the two cots had ceased creaking, Tim heard a chuckle from
across the darkness.

‘What you laughing at?’ he inquired.

‘Harmon,’ answered Pud. ‘Bet you that boy’s good and scared, eh? Bet
you he’s got his head under the blanket all right!’

Tim murmured assent. But a few minutes later, Pud changed his mind.
From the direction of Harmon’s lowly couch came loud, measured, and
unmistakable evidences of slumber!

It might have been hours later or only minutes that Pud awoke
startledly. From close by the tent a frightened voice was exclaiming,
‘Oh, my golly! Oh, my golly! Where at’s this here door? Oh, my――’

‘What’s the matter?’ cried Tim, flouncing out of his cot.

‘It’s Harmon!’ called Pud disgustedly. ‘He’s had nightmare, I guess.
Harmon! Shut up that racket! Where are you?’

‘Here I is! I can’ find the door! Oh, my golly, Mister Pud, please,
sir, you-all let me in there!’ Then there was the sound of a stumbling
body, the tent sagged and strained and Harmon fell in on his hands and
knees, illumined by two flashlights. That something had frightened him
half to death was plain, for his eyes were rolling and his teeth were
chattering as he crawled to the nearest cot. ‘Oh, lawsy, lawsy,’ he
sighed in relief.

‘Say, what’s your trouble?’ demanded Pud, striving to quiet his own
jangling nerves by speaking very sternly. Tim, still half asleep, waved
his pocket torch vaguely about the tent, his mouth open in bewilderment.

‘Mister Pud,’ answered Harmon hoarsely, ‘it was a-standin’ right over
me when I woke up and seed it! Look like it was tryin’ to nuzzle the
blanket offen me! My golly――’

‘What was?’ asked Pud.

‘Yes, sir! Standin’ right on top o’ me, with its li’l’ ol’ eyes
a-glarin’ sort o’ greenish an’ its nose right close to my face! My
golly! It was jus’ a-goin’ to bite me when I woke up!’

‘Say, for goodness’ sake! _What_ was going to bite you?’

‘_It_ was!’

‘Well, what was _it_?’

‘That there varmint, Mister Pud! What I’m tellin’ you about! The skunk!’

‘Skunk!’ echoed Pud and Tim in chorus. ‘_Skunk?_’

‘Yes, sir, skunk! I seed the white stripes on him when he done run!’

‘Gee!’ chuckled Pud. ‘A skunk! Why, a skunk wouldn’t hurt you, Harmon!
I guess you scared him a heap worse’n he scared you.’

‘No, sir, I didn’! How-come he wouldn’ harm me? Them things bite,
Mister Pud!’

‘Get out! Who ever heard of a skunk biting any one?’

‘Besides,’ laughed Tim, ‘maybe it wasn’t a skunk at all. Maybe it was
only a polecat.’

But Harmon was in no mood for such niceties. ‘Was you ever bit by a
skunk, Mister Pud?’ he asked earnestly.

‘No, of course not.’

‘Then how you know they don’ bite?’ demanded Harmon triumphantly.

‘Why――why――’ Pud felt that there was something utterly wrong with the
other’s logic, but he couldn’t at the instant find the error, and
Harmon continued with much conviction.

‘That skunk would ’a’ bit me for sure if I hadn’ woke up! Please, can’
I sleep in here, Mister Pud, with you-all? I’s scared to go back out
yonder.’

‘Well,’ began Pud hesitantly, glancing dubiously at Tim, ‘I suppose――’

‘Sure, he can,’ asserted Tim, almost indignantly. ‘Have a heart, Pud!’

Considering that it was Tim who had protested, a few days before,
against any such arrangement as was now proposed, Pud felt that he was
being put in rather a false position, but Harmon’s fervently expressed
delight drowned his sarcasm.

‘I’s certainly obliged,’ declared the darky. ‘Yes, sir! I’ll jus’
scrooch down here an’――’

‘Without anything to lie on?’ exclaimed Tim. ‘Sakes alive, Harmon, go
get your blanket!’

It was evident that Harmon had no desire to venture forth again into
the skunk-infested night, but he finally went, flashing Tim’s pocket
torch on all sides and talking loudly to keep his courage up.

Ten minutes later quiet again reigned in the tent. Pud, seeking a more
comfortable position on the unyielding canvas cot, smiled at a thought.
‘That boy,’ he reflected, ‘might be an awful brave pirate, but he
wouldn’t make much of an animal trainer!’




                               CHAPTER V

                       THE CHICKEN THAT INTRUDED


They had made the mistake of pitching the tent where the morning sun
had full play, and long before either Pud or Tim wanted to get up, the
canvas walls were aglow, and it was only by hiding their faces under
the blankets that they could keep the disturbing light from their eyes.
Shortly before seven they capitulated. Harmon was already up and about.
They could hear him cracking branches and crooning a song behind the
tent. Outside, the grass was dew-spangled, and, in spite of the ardent
sun, the air held a shivery quality that caused Tim to hesitate before
accepting Pud’s challenge to go for a swim. But he did accept, and they
found the river far warmer than the air. By the time they were dried
and dressed, Harmon was calling them to breakfast. For some moments a
particularly delectable aroma had been pervading the tent, an aroma
that suggested neither coffee nor bacon, and when they reached the fire
the mystery was explained. In the fry-pan lay, crisply browned, what
their astounded eyes could not mistake.

‘Chicken!’ they exclaimed in delighted chorus.

Harmon showed his teeth in the broadest of grins.

‘But,’ faltered Pud, after a moment of delicious contemplation,
‘where――where’d it come from?’

Harmon chuckled. ‘Who? This here chick’n? Ain’ no tellin’ where he come
from, Mister Pud. He done walk right up and wink his eye at me, an’
then he lay hisself right down in this here pan an’ fol’ his wings!’

‘Yes, he did!’ jeered Tim. ‘I suppose he plucked his own feathers off,
too!’

‘Harmon,’ said Pud sternly, ‘you stole it!’

‘No, sir, I never,’ denied Harmon solemnly. ‘I jus’ pirated him!’

‘Pirated him? Gee, that’s a new name for it! Where’d you――where’d you
“pirate” him?’

‘Up yonder, beside the road. He certainly was the runnin’est li’l
rooster I ever seed! Yes, sir, I reckon his mother must ’a’ been a
ostridge! I chase ’at li’l rascal――’

‘You had no business to do it,’ charged Pud severely. ‘Want to get us
all arrested? My goodness, that’s no way to do, Harmon!’

‘How-come? Ain’ we pirates, Mister Pud? Didn’ you say we-all was goin’
sack towns? Didn’t you? How-come it’s all right to sack a town an’
ain’ all right to sack a li’l’ skinny rooster?’

Pud looked to Tim for assistance, but Tim was trying to keep his face
straight, and he avoided Pud’s eyes carefully. Harmon stared in solemn
perplexity from one to the other.

Pud cleared his throat. ‘Well, now, it’s like this, Harmon,’ he
explained. ‘I’m leader of this――this crew, and you ain’t supposed
to steal――sack anything, not even a chicken, until I tell you to.
Understand?’

Harmon’s face cleared and he nodded vigorously.

‘All right. Now――’ Pud looked longingly at the contents of the
fry-pan――‘Now,’ he went on in a failing voice, ‘you’d better fry some
bacon. It――it wouldn’t be honest to eat that chicken, would it, Tim?’

Tim shook his head. It wasn’t a decided shake, but it was the best he
could do. Harmon voiced incredulity.

‘You mean you-all don’ want no chicken?’ he ejaculated. ‘My golly!
How-come you ain’ wantin’ none?’

‘Because we――because you stole it, Harmon,’ answered Pud sadly. ‘It
wouldn’t be right to――’

‘Why you keep on sayin’ I stole it? Ain’ I done tell you I “pirate”
it? Lawsey, how-come you talk so silly?’

‘Of course,’ observed Tim, his gaze set fixedly on the charred tip of
a chicken leg, ‘you and I didn’t steal it, Pud. And it’s dead now, and
it seems sort of wasteful to throw it away. Father says it’s sinful to
waste things, Pud.’

‘Yeah, I know,’ assented Pud. ‘Well, maybe it wouldn’t be very wrong if
we ate it, just so’s not to let it go to waste. I guess――I guess our
consciences oughtn’t to trouble us if we did. Of course, it’s different
with Harmon. He oughtn’t to have any because he came by it dishonestly.’

‘No,’ agreed Tim. ‘Still, if there was some left for him, it wouldn’t
be any affair of ours if he ate it. It would be between him and his
conscience, I guess.’

‘Yes, that’s so.’

It was a wonderful chicken. Naturally, having been such a remarkable
runner, it was inclined to be stringy and even a bit tough as to its
legs, but they had good appetites and they were not restrained by
ordinary table etiquette; and the toughest chicken leg that ever ran
must yield its meat when you take it in both hands! They gave Harmon a
share, although, of course, not the choice parts, and the darky seemed
to have settled affairs with his conscience very satisfactorily. At
least, he gave every indication of enjoyment, and he did not, as he
perhaps deserved to, choke to death on a bone!

By nine o’clock they were afloat again, and at half-past had left
Bentonburg behind. The river was not so hot as it had been yesterday
and voyaging was very pleasant. They chugged between wide fields that
swept upward and away to tree-dotted horizons or to comfortable farm
buildings, white against the blue sky. Harmon took his first lesson in
steering and was visibly thrilled as the boat responded to his pressure
on the little brass-bound wheel. In the first enthusiasm he almost ran
them aground, and only Pud’s quick action saved the day.

Pud rummaged around until he had found a pad of paper and five stamped
and addressed envelopes held together by an elastic band. These had
been supplied by his mother, with the injunction to send a letter every
day. Pud had meant to send one yesterday, but he had forgotten. Now he
placed a sheet of the paper on the lid of a box and, bidding Tim keep
an eye on the helmsman, wrote as follows:

    DEAR MOTHER AND FATHER:

    We camped last night about two miles this side of Farquhar’s
    Landing. Harmon is a fine cook. The launch is doing finely. I
    guess we will make Livermore to-day and camp near the bridge.
    The cake was fine. We are all well and enjoying ourselfs. Tim
    sends his respects.

                           Your loving son,

                                                              PUD

    P.S. If we have time we might call on Aunt Sabrina like you
    said, but maybe we had ought to push on.

At noon they tied up alongside a tumble-down pier and ate a cold lunch.
Breakfast had been hearty and sustaining, and it was decided that what
cooking they did had best be done at the end of each day’s voyage. As
only some three miles lay between them and Livermore, there seemed no
good reason to hurry, and so they lolled in the partial shade of the
landing-pier for an hour and then went into the water. The glimpse of a
fish sent Tim scurrying back to the launch for his tackle. The can of
worms had, unfortunately, been overturned in such a way as to release
most of the contents, but enough remained to bait three lines and for
nearly two hours they all sat on the edge of the pier and sought to
provide for the evening meal. But the fish wouldn’t bite, and about
four o’clock they cast off and went on again.

Livermore began a mile farther along with an outlying sprinkle of
small farms on the left of the river. These gave place to little
houses set in tiny gardens and then to more ambitious residences.
They caught the yellow gleam of a hurrying trolley car and heard its
strident hum as it charged at a grade and went lurching out of sight
behind the maples that lined the street. Harmon watched with intense
interest, trolley cars being a novelty to him. A quarter of a mile
of brick mill buildings marched beside them and the big steel bridge
suddenly swept into sight around a bend of the stream. The river
widened appreciably hereabouts and a long, pebbly island, decked with
a few forlorn trees, divided the current. Pud, at the wheel now, chose
the right-hand channel, slowing down the engine to a point where it
coughed incessantly, but survived the secret malady. There was so much
to see now――for Livermore boasted of a population of seventeen thousand
and was a manufacturing town of some importance――that the three boys
almost stared the eyes out of their heads. Harmon ejaculated ‘Lawsey!’
and ‘My golly’ at quite regular intervals. One thing that became plain
long before the bridge was reached was that Pud’s suggestion of camping
thereabouts was not at all practical. The only place they could have
pitched the tent would have been on some wharf!

‘Guess we’ll have to go on by the town,’ said Pud. ‘I didn’t know it
was all built-up like this!’

‘Thought you said you’d been here,’ said Tim.

‘So I did and so I have.’

‘Gosh, then I should think――’

‘Well, it was quite a long time ago,’ explained Pud; ‘when I was about
eight or nine. You see, Great-Aunt Sabrina lives over on the other side
of town, and we don’t usually get around here. I guess it’s grown up a
lot since I was here!’

‘Your aunt at home now?’ asked Tim, after a moment.

‘Yes, I suppose so. She don’t go about much. She’s sort of old.’ He
turned hard aport to keep out of the way of a snorting tugboat that
backed suddenly out from behind a pier.

‘Well,’ began Tim, after another brief silence.

But Pud interrupted, pointing to a conspicuous sign that adorned the
end of a brick-red shed just ahead.

‘Say, I guess we’d ought to have some more gasoline, eh?’ he asked. ‘We
didn’t have but thirty gallons when we started.’

‘Well, gosh, I guess we ain’t used any thirty gallons,’ demurred Tim.
But Pud was already negotiating the landing.

‘You, Harmon, you get up here and fend off,’ he ordered. ‘Keep her like
that, Tim.’ He went to the engine, anxiously watching the pier bear
down upon them, and finally pushed the clutch forward. There was a fine
churning under the stern, and Harmon’s bare feet set themselves against
the stringpiece and the _Jolly Rodger_, formerly the _Kismet_, sidled
up to her berth. If the gasoline station had been on the other side of
the river, the launch’s name would have been the _Vengance_, of course.

Investigation with a stick showed the gasoline tank to be still rather
more than three quarters full, but since, by this time, the proprietor
of the station was peering inquiringly down at them, Pud decided to
purchase just the same.

‘_Jolly Rodger_, eh?’ said the man as he handed the nozzle of the hose
down to them. ‘What are you, pirates?’

Pud laughed evasively, but Harmon assented proudly. ‘Yes, sir, we sure
is! We’s bloody pirates, Mister!’

‘You look it!’ laughed the man. ‘Well, better not let the police see
you, that’s all I’ve got to say! How much do you want?’

Pud was very glad that he had yielded to Tim that morning and
consented to the removal of the skull-and-cross-bones at the stern!
Suppose the police did see them and begin to ask questions! Suppose the
man who had owned that chicken had sent word about its disappearance!
He was mightily relieved when the gasoline was in and paid for, the cap
screwed back on the tank, and the launch was again shoving her nose
toward the bridge. His desire now was to leave Livermore behind and
once more reach the open spaces. The others seemed not to share his
uneasiness. They were craning their heads to see the bridge. Pud, back
at the wheel, didn’t have much time for sight-seeing, for the river
held much traffic and he was kept busy. When they were directly under
the bridge, which seemed an immeasurable height above them, but was
probably no more than thirty feet, a trolley car rumbled across and
Harmon’s upturned face went two shades lighter. And when, at the same
moment, from close by a mill whistle proclaimed five o’clock with a
sudden and deafening shriek, poor Harmon nearly turned white!

‘_My golly!_’ he yelled. ‘_What’s ’at?_’

Beyond the bridge and the press of river traffic, Tim returned to a
former subject of conversation. ‘Say, Pud, why don’t you go and see
your aunt? I should think you’d want to.’

‘Huh? Oh, gee, she――she’s awful sort of stern, Tim. I would go and see
her only she lives quite a ways back.’

‘I guess she’d be pretty hurt if she found out you’d been here and
didn’t call on her,’ said Tim.

‘Well――’

‘And I guess she’d be likely to ask you to supper, wouldn’t she? I and
Harmon wouldn’t mind if you went, Pud.’

‘Yes, she’d ask me to supper, of course, but――’

‘I guess you’d have a better supper than you would if you had what we
have, eh? Preserves, probably, and cake.’

‘Yes, she feeds a fellow great,’ acknowledged Pud, a trifle wistfully.
‘But I wouldn’t go and have supper with her and leave you and
Harmon――Say!’ Pud was struck by a thought that had occurred to his chum
long since. ‘Say, why don’t we all go?’

‘Oh, well, maybe she wouldn’t like it if I and Harmon were to butt in,’
replied Tim doubtfully. ‘She doesn’t know us.’

‘Well, gee, you’re my friends, ain’t you? Sure she’ll like it. And――and
I’d like it a sight better than going alone,’ added Pud. ‘I wouldn’t
wonder if she gave us cocoanut cake, Tim. She makes corking cocoanut
cake! Gee, you just ought to taste it!’

‘We-ell, if you think it’ll be all right――’

‘Of course it will! Gee, Aunt Sabrina’s a――a little stern, and she sort
of scares you if you don’t know her, but she don’t believe in turning
folks away hungry; especially if they’re relatives――or relatives’
friends. We’ll find a good place to leave the launch and get a street
car that’ll take us out Moorehouse Avenue. It’s only four or five
blocks from the car line. Say, how about shoving in over there?’

Pud indicated an unoccupied berth between two short piers across the
river. A warehouse loomed beyond it, its windows shuttered. Tim looked
and approved and Pud turned the launch’s nose across the stream. When
they reached the place, it didn’t look so inviting, for it was half
out of water, exposing an evil-smelling slope of black mud. But it
seemed a safe spot in which to leave the launch and their belongings,
since, as Tim pointed out, the only way to reach it was to climb over
a fence that gave onto a narrow alley. So they made the boat fast,
stowed everything into the lockers that would go there, covered the
engine with a piece of tarpaulin, and shinned up a spile to the rickety
wharf above. After that they climbed the fence, followed the alley to
its junction with a cobbled street, and set forth in search of Aunt
Sabrina.




                              CHAPTER VI

                      AUNT SABRINA DOESN’T ANSWER


It was nearly seven o’clock when they at last reached their destination.
This was because, although they twice asked directions, they never did
find Moorehouse Avenue. Since, in the course of their search, they kept
on in a general northerly direction, they eventually came to Aunt
Sabrina’s street, and there Pud turned them back toward the river and so
led them to the house. During the journey the sight of a letter-box
reminded Pud that his missive to his parents still reposed in his jacket
pocket, and he posted it.

Aunt Sabrina Puddlestone’s residence occupied an entire block of land
in a part of Livermore where, some thirty years before, it had been
the custom for families to set their big houses in the middle of a
block, and feel, even then, just a bit crowded. Now, since the town had
grown in other directions, many of these old residences still stood
unchallenged in the midst of their wide lawns, although frequently
the houses themselves were down-at-the-heels. Aunt Sabrina’s house,
though, showed no signs of disrepair. It was large and square, two
stories in height, with a little square box set atop, as though the
builder had wondered how a third story would look and had set it there
to give him an idea. The little box was called ‘The Tower’ and was a
mass of narrow windows on all sides. There was something extremely,
almost depressingly, respectable about the Puddlestone mansion. It was
so uncompromisingly angular and unadorned and white, and the big
downstair windows were so immaculate in their heavy white curtains, and
the front door, with its fan-light and side-lights, looked down across
the front lawn with such a suspicious air that――well, Tim, viewing it
for the first time, regretted having originated the idea of the visit.

A drive led from the street to the doorway and then curved back to
the street again. Beside the carriage-way ran a narrow brick path
for those afoot. Two stone urns, just a wee bit out of plumb, and a
carriage-block adorned the grass before the house. Huge maples and
oaks partly hid the old mansion, and at the back there was a veritable
plantation of trees and shrubs, so overgrown and crowded that the
late sunlight scarcely filtered through. Back there, too, near the
house, was a long line of one-story structures; a stable, at one end,
and then a carriage-house, and then an open woodshed, and then a
poultry-house.

As the three boys started up the gently ascending, curving walk to the
front door, the westing sun sent long shafts of orange light through
the maples and oaks and flashed ruddily against a corner window. But
the shadows were black and there was a somber stillness about the
place that impressed at least one of the visitors unpleasantly. Pud
appeared to be unaffected and chattered without pause all the way to
the entrance, pointing out this feature and that and recalling past
adventures. Coincident with their arrival at the door, there came a
long roll of distant thunder. In the west the sun was descending into
a bank of sullen purple clouds, while northward a sudden flare of
lightning showed.

‘Guess we’re going to be lucky to have a roof over us to-night,’ said
Pud. ‘There’s a peach of a storm coming up.’

He raised the old iron knocker and beat a startling _rat-a-tat_
in the silence. Presently, as nothing happened, he knocked again.
Subsequently, while the thunder pealed once more, he pulled
energetically at a crockery bell-knob. Far away, within the house, they
heard a bell jangle. But nobody answered. Pud muttered disgustedly and
almost yanked the bell-knob out by the roots, but still there were no
results.

‘Reckon folks ain’ to home,’ observed Harmon.

‘_Somebody’s_ here,’ said Pud impatiently. ‘Gee, Aunt Sabrina _never_
goes anywhere. It’s funny, though. Let’s try the back.’

So they trooped around the corner and along the farther side, through
a shadowed nave formed by two rows of lilacs and syringas, to the back
door. It was even more still and eerie here, and when Harmon, slapping
a mosquito on a bare leg, said ‘Ha!’ in sudden triumph, the others
jumped nervously. There was a square porch at the back, latticed on
three sides and screened inside the lattice with mosquito wire. The
stout door was closed tightly and locked. There was no bell in sight
and so Pud pounded lustily and shouted ‘Aunt Sabrina!’ several times.
After waiting a few minutes, they returned to the front of the house,
Pud nonplussed, but still insisting that somebody must be at home.

‘Maybe,’ suggested Tim, ‘your aunt’s kind of deaf.’

‘She isn’t,’ said Pud shortly. ‘Anyway, the girl ought to hear. _Some
one_ ought to hear! Gee, you’d think they were all dead!’

‘Reckon they is,’ remarked Harmon cheerfully. ‘Reckon some one done
been here and pirated ’em.’

‘Shut up,’ said Pud impatiently. ‘If you can’t talk sense, keep still.
You fellows wait here and I’ll go over to the next house and ask the
lady about it.’

‘Well, I don’t know,’ answered Tim slowly. ‘Maybe we’d better not
bother. If we started right away and got a car, I guess we’d get back
to the boat before it rained very hard.’

‘Ain’ we goin’ eat?’ asked Harmon anxiously.

‘Yes,’ said Pud decidedly. ‘And we’re going to eat right here. Gee, I
don’t want to spend the night in that launch if it’s going to rain. And
it’s too late to find a place to put the tent up.’ A crash of thunder
that shook the ground under them brought a gasp of alarm from Tim. ‘You
wait!’ shouted Pud, and set off at top speed across the lawn.

The sunlight was gone now and a coppery light filled the world.
Overhead dun-colored clouds raced fast, but in the north a great bank
of grayish-purple piled higher and higher. A big drop fell on Tim’s
hand. Then another splashed on the step. Tim wished very much that he
was back home in Millville.

Harmon, viewing the impassive front of the big house solemnly, asked
helpfully: ‘Mister Tim, you reckon this here house is hanted?’

‘Yes, I do,’ answered Tim emphatically. ‘I’ll bet it’s full of hants
and ghosts and――and everything! And I wish to goodness we’d never come
here! I don’t believe Pud’s got any aunt, and, if he has, I hope she
chokes!’

‘Must be awful deaf ol’ lady,’ mused Harmon.

The rain, after those few drops, had decided to hold off awhile, it
appeared. There was no stirring now. It was as if the world held its
breath, expectant, waiting. Another terrific crash of thunder pealed
across the heavens, nearer now, louder, more appalling. Tim grasped
Harmon’s arm tightly.

‘Gosh!’ he muttered. ‘I――I ain’ goin’ to stay here! I’m――’

At that moment Pud came into sight again. He wasn’t running now. In
fact, he wasn’t even walking briskly. His hands were in his pockets and
his whole appearance indicated dejection.

‘Gone away,’ he called dismally when he was within hearing distance.
‘She left this morning for Mumford and won’t be back till to-morrow
afternoon. She’s gone to a funeral. And the girl’s gone with her. I
guess we’re out of luck!’

‘Sure is,’ assented Harmon.

‘Well, I guess we are!’ exclaimed Tim violently. ‘Why don’t your old
aunt stay at home sometimes? Gosh, look at the fix we’re in! It’s going
to rain like anything in a minute and we’re three or four miles from
the boat and you don’t even know where the car line is and――’

‘I do, too! It’s just four or five blocks over there.’

‘Well, then why don’t you say so? Want to stay here and get struck by
lightning? Or drowned? Come on, can’t you, for goodness’ sake! If I had
an aunt――’

That is as far as Tim’s eloquence carried him, for at that instant the
sky opened and the deluge descended. With one accord they raced up the
steps, assisted in their flight by a roar of thunder and a blinding
flash of lightning, and cowered, half-stunned, under the narrow hood
above the doorway.

‘_Gee!_’ muttered Pud. Tim was beyond words. Harmon, his eyes showing
very round, giggled.

‘Ol’ Mister Thun’er sure speak right out loud that time! Whoo――ee!’

In front of them was a hissing, drumming wall of water that shut off
the world as completely as though a silver-gray curtain had been
suddenly lowered. The shelf-like projection above provided but scant
shelter from the downpour and they were all getting wet very fast. The
thunder slam-banged again and the gray world blazed with light. As the
echo of the thunder died away, there came a sharp, triumphant cry from
Pud, and the next instant he was down on his knees in the torrent,
poking about at the foot of the steps. Then he was back again, gasping,
laughing, shaking the water from his face, with a big iron key in one
hand!

‘Just remembered!’ he shouted above the seethe and hiss of the rain.
‘She always hides it there! Funny I didn’t think of it sooner!’ As he
spoke, he fitted the key in the lock, there was a creaking sound, and
the door fell open before them.

Pud stamped water from his clothes, tossed his reeking hat to a
table, and closed the big door again. ‘There!’ he cried triumphantly.
‘How’s this?’ Then, partly from reaction, he fell to laughing loudly,
awakening strange echoes in the big, dim hallway. ‘Gee, wouldn’t Aunt
Sabrina be mad if she knew? I can see her face right now!’

Tim started nervously and looked behind him, but there was no Aunt
Sabrina in sight; only the dark portals and the blacker well of the
broad stairway. He wiped his drenched face and neck with an already
damp handkerchief and gave vent to his feelings. ‘Of all the blamed
idiots!’ he sputtered. ‘Keeping us standing out there in that rain when
the door-key was right there all the time! I’m soaking wet right to the
skin and I’ll probably catch cold, and it’s all your fault! If you had
any sense――’

A salvo of thunder, and the hallway was ablaze with vivid white light!
Tim stood rooted with terror, his mouth still open, but no words
coming! As silence fell again, both he and Pud started and stared in
alarm toward the doorway at the back. From beyond it came faint but
unmistakable sounds; footsteps, a clatter of metal! Tim turned a glance
along the dim hallway toward the front door and had already made one
hurried step in its direction, when Pud laughed with nervous relief.

‘Harmon,’ he said.

Sure enough, Harmon was no longer with them! Together they made their
way toward the sounds, through the darkened dining-room and the dimmer
pantry to the kitchen. Harmon was in the act of setting fire to the
paper and kindlings he had stuffed into the big stove. He looked up as
they entered and grinned serenely.

‘Goin’ have us a fire in ’bout two shakes, Mister Pud, so’s we can get
us dry.’

‘Great!’ approved Pud, and found the gas bracket and sent a flood of
illumination over the big room.

Somehow, the light and the sound of the crackling flames seemed to make
everything all right at once. Tim forgot his peevishness and wriggled
out of his jacket, and Harmon, having moved a folding clothes-dryer
to the end of the stove, spread the garment out on it. Pud was on the
porch now, peering into the big refrigerator. Harmon added more wood
to the fire and then carefully applied lumps of coal. A gentle warmth
was already perceptible. Tim’s frowns smoothed out and he smiled
contentedly as he rubbed damp hands together. Pud came back with the
results of his foray and set them on the table; a carton of eggs, a
shoulder of boiled ham, butter, a sauce-dish of stewed tomatoes, and a
jar of milk not quite full. Tim cheered so loudly that a jarring peal
of thunder made almost no impression on him!

In fact, after that they almost forgot the storm entirely. Here was
warmth and light and food; slathers of food, for Pud had invaded the
pantry and produced, as if by magic, bread and jelly and cup-cakes and
a jar of preserved ginger. With the viands assembled, and Harmon fairly
crooning over them, he armed himself with a lamp and made his way up
the big staircase into the silent, mysterious regions above. To tell
the truth, he didn’t like that excursion much, but he made it just the
same――rather hurriedly――and returned with three blankets. Then they all
disrobed and hung their wet clothes before the fire, which was now
going at a great rate, and drew the blankets about them. After that it
was up to Harmon. Pud and Tim drew chairs as near the stove as they
might without interfering with the cook and sat back in blissful ease
and pleasant anticipation.

The sight of Harmon trying to fry eggs and hold his blanket about him
at one and the same time sent them into convulsions of laughter, and
Harmon, joining in, danced around the kitchen with a tin spoon waving
about his head. The acme of mirth was reached when Pud imagined Aunt
Sabrina entering at the moment!

What a dinner that was! Or, rather, let us say what a banquet, for
no mere ordinary dinner ever provided such a variety of dishes! They
had two kinds of ham; fried ham until it gave out and then cold ham;
eggs――two apiece; stewed tomatoes; bread and butter; coffee――that was
Harmon’s brilliant thought; milk while it lasted; cup-cakes; sweet
crackers; currant jelly; preserved ginger――which Harmon tried and
disapproved of; and many of Aunt Sabrina’s early sugar-pears, these
latter discovered by Pud on the dining-room sideboard. But even that
array was none too great for three such appetites, and when they had
finished the top of the kitchen table was almost as bare of crumbs as
it had been an hour before!

They took counsel then. The storm had abated, but it was still raining
busily and with no sign of cessation. The thought of returning through
the rain to that drenched and comfortless launch held no allure. Here
there was warmth and shelter; beds if they dared take possession of
them. Tim’s courage failed at the idea of climbing into one of Aunt
Sabrina’s immaculate four-posters, but Pud was for being hung for a
sheep instead of a lamb. As for Harmon, busily washing up, his advice
was not asked. Yet, in the end, it was Harmon who decided the question
of going or staying.

‘These here clo’es ain’ goin’ be dry ’fore mornin’,’ he declared.
‘Reckon we jus’ have to sit aroun’ an’ wait till they is.’

Whereupon, remembering he was a pirate, Pud seized the lamp again and
strode toward the hall. ‘Come on,’ he commanded. ‘Let’s find out where
we sleep!’

Dutifully, but doubting his wisdom, Tim followed.




                              CHAPTER VII

                       THE PRISONER IN THE TOWER


Pud and Tim shared a big four-poster bed in the room always occupied
by the former when, once a year, he accompanied his parents to
Great-Aunt Sabrina’s. This was at the back of the house, to the left,
the smallest of the rooms on the second floor. Opposite, across the
broad hall that ran from front to back, was a huge bathroom, containing
an old-fashioned zinc tub boxed in walnut paneling, and cutting off
a corner of it was a stairway leading down to the kitchen. Harmon
was given a bed made of two thick comforters from the maid’s room,
doubled lengthwise and laid on the floor. A single blanket answered for
covering.

As the day had been, on the whole, fairly strenuous, all hands were
fast asleep before ten. Pud, though, didn’t slumber very peacefully. He
had overindulged in the preserved ginger, I think. At all events, while
Tim, having once fallen asleep, scarcely moved, Pud thrashed about a
good deal and awoke more than once to the sound of Harmon’s gurgling
respirations and the gentle, persistent patter of the rain outside.
They had left the door open, such being their custom when at home, and
it was when Pud had returned to full consciousness for the second or,
possibly, third time that he heard a sound that could be attributed
neither to Harmon nor the rain.

The sound came from somewhere below and suggested to the curious
listener the opening of a stubborn drawer containing some metallic
contents that rattled together. His first thought was, of course, that
Aunt Sabrina had returned home, and the thought was accompanied by an
unpleasant sinking sensation. It also had the effect of bringing him
very wide awake. For a minute he lay in bed and considered a course
of action. It might be that, if he did nothing at all, his presence,
and that of his companions, would remain unsuspected until morning. On
the other hand, it was more probable that Aunt Sabrina’s sharp eyes
would see that things were not just as she had left them, or that the
maid would miss the comforters and blanket and institute a search for
them. On the whole, as little as the plan appealed to him, Pud decided
finally that right now was the time to appear and explain. Of course,
Aunt Sabrina would look very fearsome and probably have quite a lot
to say about boys with wet feet dirtying up her floors and helping
themselves to her victuals and――

Right there Pud sat up in bed very suddenly, staring amazedly into the
gray darkness. Why, it couldn’t be Aunt Sabrina! It just _couldn’t_ be
Aunt Sabrina for the simple reason that he had locked the front door
on the inside and the big iron key still remained where he had turned
it! And without the key, how could Aunt Sabrina have got in? He simply
couldn’t imagine either Lydia, the middle-aged maid and companion, or
Aunt Sabrina forcing a window and climbing over the ledge! But if it
wasn’t Aunt Sabrina stirring quietly about downstairs, who could it be?

His heart beat faster while he strained his ears. For a long moment
he heard nothing, and he was just about to tell himself with vast
relief that he had imagined the previous sounds when they came again.
Resisting the impulse to awaken Tim, he crept out of the big bed and
made his way noiselessly to the door. From below, seemingly from the
dining-room, came the tinkle of metal and the creak of a board.

‘_Robbers!_’ thought Pud.

His first impulse was to return and awaken Tim and Harmon, his second
to make certain that he was right. He would look an awful fool if he
waked the others up and then discovered that the suspicious sounds
had been made by――well, some perfectly innocent thing such as a cat!
After a moment of hesitation he emerged into the hall. The stairway
was a long distance, but he reached the railing finally and, guiding
himself by it, crept on until he could crane his head over it and
bring the dining-room door into his field of vision. The stairs and
the hall below were dark, but beyond the open door of the dining-room
there was light. It was a very weak light and Pud guessed that it came
from a small electric torch. While he gazed it vanished entirely. Then
it reappeared, stronger this time, as though it was focused closer
to the door into the hall. There was a shuffling, dragging sound and
the faint clink of metal once more, as though muffled by cloth. Then,
with startling effect on the watcher, the light fell on the edge of
the doorway and traveled past into the hall, illumining it with faint,
white radiance.

Pud retreated swiftly to the room. There, a hand on the doorknob, he
thought hard. What was going on downstairs was quite plain to him.
Some one was stealing Aunt Sabrina’s silver! Aunt Sabrina thought a
good deal of her silver, for much of it had belonged in her family for
several generations, and she would, Pud knew, be terribly grieved if
she lost it. Therefore she mustn’t lose it. Some way he must circumvent
the robber. The telephone, an old-style wall affair, was in the lower
hall and not two yards from the dining-room. Plainly that offered no
solution. Pud considered a sortie in force, but he remembered that
burglars carried weapons. Even if they managed to frighten the burglar,
he would probably take his booty with him. Further planning was
interrupted by the soft sound of feet on the stairs, and Pud retired
inside his door and watched breathlessly through a half-inch crack.

The intruder mounted the stairs unhurriedly, with only an occasional
inquiring flash of the diminutive torch. He made very little noise,
but, on the other hand, did not seem particularly fearful of being
heard. In short, he gave Pud the impression of one not in the least
concerned with the possible presence of other persons in the house,
and so, Pud reasoned, he had learned of Aunt Sabrina’s absence and was
proceeding under the assumption that he was perfectly safe and could
take all the time he wanted. At the head of the stairs, he swept the
light about him, keeping, as always, the rays close to the floor, and
in that instant Pud, peering through the narrow aperture in the door,
saw him for the first time.

To be more exact, what Pud saw was the silhouette of a man’s form, a
form apparently rather small and slim and not nearly so formidable as
imagination had pictured it. Then the light went out again and the form
melted into the darkness. Light footsteps trod the carpet and a door
squeaked faintly. The burglar had gone into Aunt Sabrina’s room, on
the front of the house. Pud didn’t believe the fellow would find much
of value in there, and evidently he didn’t, for he was out again very
soon, his coming indicated by another quick flare of the torch. Across
the hall was an empty chamber, known as the ‘best room.’ That held the
burglar’s attention even a shorter time, and from there he came back,
past the head of the stairway and disappeared into the maid’s room.

Meanwhile Pud was thinking up plans and discarding them rapidly;
to lock the door and somehow get to the ground from the window and
alarm the neighbors; to shout for help from the same window; to get
downstairs by the back passage, the door to which was almost opposite,
take possession of the burglar’s loot and make off with it before
the latter could follow. But none of these schemes promised well.
Behind him was the peaceful sound of Tim’s breathing and the louder
respirations of Harmon. Pud had time for a brief thought of their
surprise when they awoke and learned of what had been happening; and
then he hoped hard that they wouldn’t awake just yet, for the least
sound from them would, if heard by the midnight visitor, either send
that person scuttling away with his booty or――well, Pud didn’t like to
dwell on the alternative. Burglars, he believed, were dreadfully fond
of shooting holes in persons who interfered with their plans! But Pud
had assured himself that the key was on the inside of the lock and he
was rather certain that he could get that door closed and that key
turned in mighty quick time when the right moment came.

Across the hall from the maid’s room and directly opposite was the door
giving onto the stairway that led to The Tower. Next to it was the door
of a second spare room. Then, toward the back of the house, were the
bathroom door, wide open at present, and, next, the door to the kitchen
stairway, closed. It was fair to assume that the burglar meant to
make a thorough inspection of the premises, and that sooner or later,
probably last of all, he would want to know what was in the room behind
whose door Pud stood on guard. When that happened――well, Pud didn’t
know just what he would do then, but meanwhile he had thought of a plan!

Its success depended on two things; whether the burglar proved curious
enough to want to know what lay at the top of The Tower stairway and
whether the key of the stairway door was on the inside or out. That
there was a key Pud knew for a fact. His heart beat a little faster
as the light showed once more for an instant and the burglar, having
made a thorough and, Pud hoped, profitless search of Lydia’s room,
emerged again into the hall. Then the light traveled along the stairway
spindles, swept the edge of the carpet and crept upward along the white
panels of The Tower door. And then it went out, but not before Pud had
seen, with intense satisfaction, the key!

In the succeeding darkness there came the soft, padding sound of the
man’s feet on the carpet and then the faint click of the latch. Again
the light flared. The burglar was in the open doorway and the rays of
the torch were exploring the stairs that led upward. A long moment
passed. Then darkness fell once more and Pud’s heart sank. His plan had
failed! He waited for the sound of the man’s steps again, but there
was only silence out there. Uneasily, Pud’s hand tightened on the knob
and he stood prepared to close and lock the door. But at that moment a
sound came to him that brought a thrill of renewed hope, the sound of a
stumbling step on the bare stairs! Momentarily The Tower doorway showed
lighter against the gloom of the hall and Pud widened the aperture of
his own door and craned his head out. Now he could hear unmistakably
the creaking of the burglar’s feet on The Tower stairs. Pud crept out
into the darkness. Once more there was a dim light across the way. The
man had reached the little landing and was making the turn.

Pud took a long, deep breath and crept down the hall toward The Tower
door. He reached it, pulled it slowly toward him. From above came the
complaining of the stair treads, then silence. Pud could imagine the
man’s disgust as he swept his light over the square emptiness of that
chamber, and something very close to a chuckle mingled with the click
of the latch as it slipped into place. Swiftly then Pud’s fingers flew
to the key. Perhaps it had been unused so long that it had forgotten
how to turn, for it resisted his efforts stubbornly. He put all his
strength against it unavailingly, and his heart sank. Beyond the door
were faint creakings. The burglar was coming back down the stairs!
Caution urged Pud to flight, but he was stubborn, too, and, getting a
new grasp on the key and putting the fingers of his left hand about the
knuckles of his right, he made a final and desperate effort. There was
a loud protest from the unwilling key, but it turned!

Then Pud ran!

Back at the door of his own room he paused and listened. There was no
sound for a long moment save the thumping of his own heart. Then the
knob of The Tower door was gently turned. A second silence. Then there
was a straining, creaking noise as the imprisoned man put his weight
against the door. But Aunt Sabrina’s house had been built in the days
when doors were made strong and thick and heavy, and for the time, at
least, Pud had no fear of its yielding. With a bound, Pud was pulling
the blanket from Tim and prodding him into wakefulness, and after that
many things happened with confusing rapidity.

Lights flared upstairs and down. Pud spoke breathlessly to a sleepy
telephone operator and, after what seemed an interminable time, to a
gruff-voiced police sergeant. Tim and Harmon, close to The Tower door,
talked to each other in deep, bass voices designed to impress the
burglar with the fact that his escape in that direction was barred by
at least two resolute men. As Pud left the telephone to light the gas
in the dining-room and rescue Aunt Sabrina’s silver, he heard Harmon
saying in loud tones that seemed to come from his boots――or that would
have come from his boots had he worn any: ‘I’s sure cravin’ to use this
here ol’ resolver, Mister Daley. I ain’ had me a chance to shoot it
off for a long time!’ And then came Tim’s voice, deep and husky: ‘And
I’d certainly like to use this automatic of mine, Mister Johnson!’

Pud found what he expected to find, a burlap bag filled with Aunt
Sabrina’s smaller silver and about all the larger pieces. Some of the
latter had not been molested, and these, as Pud guessed, were only
silver-plated. The locked drawers of the big, old-fashioned mahogany
sideboard had been forced, and Pud reflected that for the burglar’s
sake he hoped the latter would not be around when Aunt Sabrina viewed
the chipped and cracked edges of the wood! To be on the safe side,
he dragged the bag to a closet and turned the key on it. Then he ran
upstairs again and relieved Tim while the latter donned the rest of his
clothes. They were all fully dressed by the time the police arrived,
and Pud admitted them somewhat impressively through the front door,
while Tim and Harmon leaned over the upstairs balusters and stared down
enthralled.

That the burglar had attempted to descend from his prison by the roof
was evident later from the fact that one of The Tower windows was
found open. Probably his courage had failed him as soon as he had set
foot on the slippery, rain-filmed shingles and he had decided to face
trial rather than risk a broken neck. At all events, when they opened
The Tower door and went cautiously up, four burly officers with drawn
revolvers, there he sat on the top step, a rather hungry-looking,
undersized little rat of a man, calmly awaiting them.

‘Ho,’ said the officer in command of the force, ‘it’s only “Slim”
Towle! Come on down, Slim, and we’ll give you a ride.’

So Slim came down docilely, looking in fact, or so Pud thought,
rather relieved, and one of the men went through his pockets very
carefully and took out quite a number of interesting articles including
a black-jack, a small nickeled pocket torch, and one or two other
personal articles――but no revolver!――and a large collection of small
trinkets picked up during his visit. There was, for instance, Aunt
Sabrina’s gold locket that held a strand of braided brown hair, a
tortoise-shell comb, a silver-and-pearl paper-cutter, Lydia’s bar-pin
set with imitation emeralds, a gold hairpin, a fine gold chain, and a
single silver cuff-link. All of which articles, announced the police,
would have to be taken to Headquarters and there claimed by their
owners. Then ‘Slim’ Towle, looking a bit bored and rather weary, went
down the stairs between two of the officers and out the front door.
The officer in charge of operations――a lieutenant, Pud thought――viewed
the burlap bag and its contents, nodded and said:

‘Had a pretty good haul there. Well, if folks will leave their silver
lying around loose, they’ll lose it sooner or later.’ Then he turned
suddenly and viewed the three lads with stern gaze. ‘Now,’ he asked
disconcertingly, ‘who are you and what are you doing here?’

Pud had to make rather a long story of it, but in the end the officer
went off without arresting any of them for complicity in the crime and
they watched him climb into the patrol wagon with vast relief. By that
time the eastern sky was graying and the rain, having subsided first
to a drizzle, had ceased entirely. Harmon lighted a fire in the stove
again and prepared breakfast from what remained in the larder while
Pud and Tim returned upstairs and, as best they could, tidied up. Tim
was inclined to be a bit disgruntled and peevish because Pud had not
awakened him sooner and allowed him to share in the excitement from
the first, but Pud explained and excused until Tim grudgingly forgave
him. Harmon’s skill as a cook was not so apparent this morning, since
recent events had left him in a highly excited state, but they made out
a satisfactory breakfast of coffee, eggs, and toast. Pud closed the
outside blinds across the window in the dining-room at which ‘Slim’
Towle had made his entrance by removing a pane of glass, and finally
announced that he was ready to leave. But at the last instant he
bethought him of something and reëntered the house, to be gone several
minutes. During his absence he wrote a note to Aunt Sabrina and left
it leaning against the coffee-urn on the sideboard where she could not
fail to find it. The note was as follows:

    DEAR AUNT:

    We came to see you, but you were not home so we stayed because
    it was raining and lightning. We slept in the back room and did
    not hurt anything I hope, and we took some food as we were very
    hungry. I caught the burglar, and everything he was going to
    take is in the bag in the closet except some jewelry of yours
    and Lydia, and the policeman said you would have to go to the
    police station and claim it. We had a very enjoyable visit, but
    were sorry not to see you. Good-bye.

                       Your affectionate nephew,

                                     ANSON PUDDLESTONE PRINGLE, JR.

Then Pud locked the front door and hid the key under the lowest step
and, with Tim at his side and Harmon padding along behind, set forth
under the first weak rays of the sun to find the Moorehouse Avenue car
line.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                              THE RESCUE


The return to the launch was uneventful. They had the car to themselves
most of the way, and Tim dozed off in a corner. Pud lost his bearings
after they had reached the center of town and so they were carried
four blocks farther than they should have gone and had a long, wet and
dismal trudge to the river and made two failures before they found
the right alley. The _Vengance_ was extremely wet and soggy when they
reached her. The potatoes had wandered all around, the rain had leaked
into several of the lockers, and a _swish-swashing_ sound under the
floor informed them that there was much bailing to be done. With the
passing of the early morning excitement, reaction had set in and every
one’s spirits were low. Tim complained that he had not had sufficient
sleep and even Harmon seemed more solemn than usual. One thing, though,
they were agreed on, which was that they had had quite enough of
Livermore!

But there the engine failed to agree with them. Pud turned the
fly-wheel until he was red-faced and breathless, and then Tim tried
it. Then Pud peered into the gasoline tank and fiddled with every
movable part of the engine. After that he thought of priming the
cylinders, but that didn’t produce the desired result. Half an hour
passed and the sun came up over the roofs of the town and deepened the
flush on Pud’s countenance. At intervals Pud arose and turned the wheel
over. At intervals he sank back on the seat in exhaustion. At intervals
Tim performed a similar routine. Once, very early in the proceedings,
the engine had emitted a faint but heartening cough. Since then it had
not even sneezed.

Tim offered many well-meant suggestions and theories, but Pud received
them all coldly. Between spells at the fly-wheel he viewed the engine
in deep disgust, a disgust that was just short of loathing, and said
a great many unkind things about it. Toward the last he included Andy
Tremble in his remarks. Of the three aboard, Harmon alone retained his
equanimity. As his companions became more and more depressed, Harmon’s
spirits visibly lightened. When, though, he sought to give expression
to his cheerfulness by playing soft melodies on his mouth-organ, Pud
turned on him wrathfully and threatened to ‘pitch that thing in the
river’ if he didn’t quit!

‘All you do is sit there and chuckle,’ accused Pud. ‘_You_ don’t break
your back on this old wheel! _You_ don’t blister your hands! You
just――just sit there and think it’s funny! My goodness, I should think
you’d be ashamed!’

‘Jus’ you-all let me turn it,’ said Harmon eagerly.

‘Yes,’ said Tim, ‘let him try it, Pud.’

‘No, sir! He don’t know how. He’d probably break his wrist or
something.’

‘No, sir, Mister Pud, I won’t. I done seen how you-all does it. Jus’
you let me――’

‘Well, all right,’ agreed Pud grudgingly. ‘But you have to take hold of
the handle like this. See? And then pull it out when you’ve turned it
over, because if you don’t it might fly back on you and break your arm.
Now you be careful, Harmon.’

‘Sure will!’ Harmon heaved upward――

Then he sat down suddenly on the floor, the handle flew against the
locker and――the engine started!

‘Are you hurt?’ cried Tim anxiously.

Harmon felt of himself gingerly. Then he shook his head in solemn
negation.

‘No, sir, I ain’ hurt, but how-come it ac’ so short with me, Mister
Tim?’

It was Tim’s turn to laugh then, and Pud’s, and they seized it. Harmon
viewed them with funereal reproach and picked himself up. Pride
asserted itself. ‘Ain’ any ol’ engine can hol’ out agains’ me,’ he
declared as he went dignifiedly back to the stern.

The early start brought them to Berryville before nine, and an hour
later they steered the launch up to a shaded bank and went in swimming.
It was the hottest day they had so far experienced, and life aboard the
launch when the sun beat fiercely and scarcely any air moved was none
too pleasant. After their swim, a protracted affair, they remained in
bathing attire, deciding to have lunch there and wait for the cooler
afternoon before going on. They pulled the launch downstream a few rods
to where the sunlight could reach it and spread their damp tent and
bedding out on the bank to dry. Tim went to sleep then, Harmon sat in
the stern of the boat and played on the mouth-organ, and Pud fished. At
twelve hunger asserted itself and they made a hearty lunch. Afterward
Tim dozed again and Pud went back to his luckless fishing, assisted
by Harmon. The fish evidently had no appetites for grasshoppers and
Harmon’s search for worms was unsuccessful. At three, by which time a
faint breeze was stirring, they bundled things back on the boat and
went on down the river.

The river had changed now. It was three times as wide as it had
been when they had set forth at Millville, the pleasant forests had
disappeared and settlements were close together. Boats were numerous,
too; fishing launches that chugged noisily past, tugs that towed
schooners of lumber or barges of coal, small sailboats that tacked
back and forth in the light breeze, flat-bottomed punts, occupied by
patient fishermen, anchored along the margins. While to-day the bosom
of the river was hardly more than ruffled, Tim realized that, with a
strong wind blowing, the same stream might well become uncomfortable to
a poor sailor; and Tim, while not certain, had a suspicion that rough
water would prove him to be such. Consequently, he accepted with secret
enthusiasm Pud’s plan to turn into Fox River, some few miles below, and
ascend that tributary for a way.

‘But,’ stated Tim positively, ‘I’m not going near Swamp Hole, Pud.’

‘Well, who wants to go there?’ demanded Pud. ‘Gee, Swamp Hole’s twenty
miles or more up the river! Besides, I’ve heard that you can’t get to
it, anyway, unless you know just how. That’s what makes it like it is;
filled with murderers and such-like folks, I mean. They just know the
officers can’t find them.’

‘Well, I don’t suppose,’ answered Tim charitably, ‘that they’re all
murderers up there. I guess there are some decent people, Pud.’

But Pud didn’t hold with that notion. He shook his head and frowned
darkly. ‘I guess decent folks wouldn’t be likely to live in with all
those cut-throats and――and desperadoes, Tim. No, sir, I guess they’re
all pretty much alike in Swamp Hole, and I wouldn’t go in there for any
amount of money. Well, maybe I would for a couple of hundred dollars,
but not any less than that.’

‘A couple of hundred!’ exclaimed Tim. ‘Gosh, I wouldn’t do it for――for
a couple of million!’

‘Well,’ hedged Pud, ‘of course I didn’t mean I’d go alone. I wouldn’t
mind going with Mr. Garvey, the marshal, and, maybe, Sumner Jones
and――and Mr. Thrasher.’

‘Maybe, if they were all armed,’ granted Tim doubtfully.

‘The’s worser things than murderers in that ol’ Swamp Hole,’ observed
Harmon gravely. ‘The’s ghos’es an’ hants, Mister Pud.’

‘There’s no such thing as ghosts,’ replied Pud severely.

‘How-come?’

‘Because there isn’t!’

‘Mister Pud, did you-all ever see a ghos’?’

‘No, I didn’t, and there’s no use in your asking me “How do I know
then!” Because that’s no argument at all! Nobody believes in ghosts any
more, Harmon; nobody but just darkies!’

‘How-come Mister Tim say they was hants in that there house what you’
Aun’ live in, then? He ain’ no darky!’

‘I suppose he was just fooling,’ answered Pud, looking to Tim for
agreement. Tim nodded, but Harmon insisted with conviction:

‘He don’ ac’ like he’s foolin’ when he say it!’

Further discussion was prevented by their arrival at the mouth of the
Fox River, and Pud swung the bow of the launch to starboard and entered
new water. The Fox proved a sluggish stream, but even so the launch
showed speedily that moving against a current was quite different
from moving with it, and although Tim, at Pud’s command, advanced the
throttle to the limit, the boat seemed contented to chug along at a
four-mile gait. Perhaps it may have had a premonition of what awaited
beyond and was loath to meet it!

For a while the stream, nowhere much more than a hundred yards wide,
curved slowly between low banks edged with rushes from which wide
fields, mostly tilled, ascended gently to distant farmhouses and barns.
It was perhaps an hour before the forest closed in upon them and they
found themselves moving slowly through silent reaches where the
shadows lay broadly on the scarcely moving water. It was very warm in
there, for the trees cut them off from the breeze that was swaying the
topmost branches, high above.

The heat and the silence together seemed to exert a depressing effect
on them, and when they spoke they found themselves quite unconsciously
talking in lowered voices. It was a relief when, chugging around
a bend, they came on an aged negro in the stern of a punt, half
asleep, while two corks lay placidly on the surface near by. He awoke
sufficiently to wave and bow to them and to shake his head when Pud
asked if he was having any luck. When they went from sight around the
next curve, his chin was back on his chest once more.

The river turned and twisted continually, but the turns were leisurely
and there was deep water right to within a few feet of the tree-hung
banks. Now and then a snag sent them farther into the middle, but on
the whole navigation was easy and Pud might almost have emulated the
old darky and dozed at his post. Turtles slipped noiselessly from
half-submerged logs and now and then a fish broke the smooth surface.
An occasional kingfisher awoke the silence with strident challenge and
jays called mockingly from the woods. Once they passed a mother duck
herding four youngsters before her to safety, and Harmon’s eyes grew
very round and hungry-looking. It was now time to think of disembarking
and setting up camp, and Pud watched anxiously for a clearing, but the
trees continued on each side, so closely set, so tangled in undergrowth
as to afford no chance for the tent. Tim showed indications of mutiny
and suggested dining on board and finding a camp-site later, but just
then a new turn of the stream promised better things.

On the left the forest gave place to a clearing that ran back,
fan-shaped, to the summit of a distant slope. At some time, not very
recently it seemed, the timber had been cut, and everywhere within
the bare expanse unsightly stumps and unburned mounds of slashings
remained. Over the water hung a decrepit wharf, too high at the present
stage of the river to offer convenient landing. Well beyond the wharf,
drawn to the edge of the red-clay bank and moored to a near-by stump,
lay a shanty-boat. This was the first of its kind they had encountered,
although farther up the river they found them numerous enough. The
present one was small, with a four-foot roofed deck at the shoreward
end from which a plank led upward to the bank. It was painted green,
but the color had faded to a neutral tint. There were small one-sash
windows on the sides and end. That the shanty-boat was in use was
proved by two things; smoke issuing from the stovepipe thrust through
the roof and a person sitting on an upturned nail-keg on the deck. At
first the person appeared to be a boy, but a closer look showed her to
be a girl in a bluish dress.

‘I guess,’ said Pud, ‘we can camp beyond ’em, but maybe we’d better
ask.’

At sound of the launch the girl on the shanty-boat had turned to
observe it. Now she stood up and waved a hand. Pud grunted merely, but
Tim, more polite, waved back. Pud turned the nose of the _Vengance_
toward the shanty-boat and prepared to hail it. He was going to say
‘Hello!’ and then ‘Say, mind if we camp beyond you folks?’ All he did
say, though, was ‘Hello!’, for at the same instant the girl spoke.

‘Help!’ she called.

The occupants of the launch stared in surprise. Doubtless, though, they
had misunderstood her, and Pud asked, ‘What did you say?’ This time
there was no mistaking.

‘_Help!_’ said the girl.

Pud looked about him in every direction. So did Tim. So, too, did
Harmon. Not a person was to be seen. Never, indeed, had any one of them
ever looked on a more quiet, peaceful, and lonely scene. Pud viewed Tim
blankly and received as blank a gaze in reply. By this time the two
boats were close together and mechanically Pud eased the launch up to
the stern of the other, motioning Tim to throw out the clutch. Harmon,
in the rôle of deck-hand, laid hold of the shanty-boat. Pud now gave
serious attention to the girl.

She was apparently thirteen, possibly fourteen years old, with a thin,
deeply tanned face and coppery-brown hair drawn tightly back from her
forehead into a long braid which, at the present moment, hung across
one shoulder and terminated in a bow of bright red ribbon. She wore a
dress of some thin stuff that showed blue flowers on a white ground.
It was not a new dress, nor, observed Pud, was it particularly clean.
Brown cotton stockings enclosed a pair of painfully thin ankles. A pair
of scuffed black shoes completed her costume. Pud decided that she
was not at all pretty. In fact, he took an instant, if mild, dislike
to the girl; but this was more because she was regarding him with an
intense, unwavering stare from a pair of large dark eyes, a stare that
disconcerted him unpleasantly.

Tim, untroubled by the hypnotic gaze, voiced his curiosity.

‘Say, what’s the matter?’ he demanded. ‘What you yelling “Help” for?’

‘Because,’ replied the girl, still regarding Pud, ‘I want to be
rescued.’ She had rather a nice voice, sort of low and gurgly, and
there was such a tragic note in it that Tim thrilled and once more
gazed apprehensively about over the desolate scene.

‘Rescued!’ echoed Pud. ‘What――who――Say, what are you doing? Getting
funny with us?’

‘Oh, no!’ The girl leaned nearer and dropped her voice. ‘You must take
me away from here before they come back! You will, won’t you? Oh, say
you will not desert me!’

‘Take you where? Who is it’s coming back?’ asked Pud dazedly.

‘Those――those awful men!’ She looked swiftly, fearfully toward the edge
of the woods, and Pud looked, too, a sort of creepy feeling edging up
his spine. ‘They kidnaped me from my happy home and they’re keeping me
a prisoner in this dreadful place.’ She was speaking now in a thrilling
whisper. ‘You can’t imagine what I’ve been through! It――it has been
terrible!’ She shuddered. So did Pud and Tim, the latter having joined
Pud at the bow. ‘You will rescue me, won’t you?’

‘Well,’ muttered Pud uncomfortably, ‘I don’t know. It――it sounds sort
of funny to me. Say, what’s your name, and where do you live?’

‘My name’s Gladys Ermintrude Liscomb, and I live in Corbin. Oh, won’t
you please, _please_ take me home to my poor, distracted mother? If you
are seeking a reward――’

‘Gosh, no!’ exclaimed Tim. ‘Sure, we’ll take you home! Won’t we, Pud?’

‘Gee, I don’t know!’ Pud scowled at the deck. ‘What I want to know――’

‘Oh, dear!’ cried the girl distressedly. ‘We’re wasting time! They’ll
be back almost any moment now. They went off with their guns an hour
ago. They said they were going hunting, but’――again she shuddered――‘I
don’t know what awful deed they are up to!’

‘That’s right,’ urged Tim, tugging Pud’s arm. ‘We’d better get a move
on.’

‘What I want to know,’ repeated Pud doggedly, ‘is what they wanted to
kidnap you for.’ He viewed Gladys Ermintrude in cold apprisal. ‘You
don’t look to me like the sort of girls that get kidnaped. I guess your
folks ain’t got much money, have they?’

‘They have, too!’ declared the girl resentfully. ‘They’re fabulously
wealthy, you horrid thing! Why, I wouldn’t be one bit surprised if
mother had offered a thousand dollars reward for me!’

‘Huh, that isn’t much,’ said Pud.

‘Or maybe ten thousand,’ added Gladys Ermintrude hastily.

‘Gosh!’ murmured Tim.

Even Pud was impressed now, but he was still cautious.

‘Well, maybe it’s all right,’ he muttered, ‘but Corbin’s a good eight
miles from here, I guess, and we’ve got to get our tent pitched. Maybe
in the morning we could attend to it for you.’

The girl’s wail of despair was really heart-rending. ‘Too late!’ she
cried. ‘To-morrow I shall be far away!’

‘Oh, say, Pud,’ begged Tim, ‘have a heart, can’t you? Gosh, suppose she
was your sister or something! Gosh, I guess you wouldn’t like it if she
was! I guess――’

‘I haven’t got any sister,’ replied Pud stubbornly. ‘Anyhow, what I say
is――’

‘Yonder’s them,’ interrupted Harmon in pleased excitement.

They all looked. Several hundred yards distant two men, carrying
shot-guns, had emerged into the clearing. They were undeniably
rough-looking persons, and, rescue or no rescue, Pud instantly decided,
this was no place to spend the night!

‘Quick!’ said Gladys Ermintrude tensely. ‘Start your engine! It won’t
take me a second to get my bag!’

She disappeared into the shanty-boat and Tim sprang to the fly-wheel.
Pud stared irresolutely after the girl and then uneasily toward the
leisurely approaching men. The engine came to life and Pud reached
a decision. He didn’t like that silly girl, and there was something
mighty funny about the whole business, but here was real adventure!

‘Stand ready to cast off!’ he ordered briskly.

‘Er-huh,’ replied Harmon.

Then they waited. From within the shanty-boat came faint sounds, but
no Gladys Ermintrude. Pud looked apprehensively at the approaching
kidnapers. They were walking more briskly now, even, he thought,
hurriedly. Doubtless they had caught sight of the launch. A sunbeam
glinted on the barrel of a gun and Pud felt suddenly chilly at the back
of his neck. He called hoarsely.

‘Hey there! Gladys Whatyoucall it! Get a move on, can’t you?’

‘Just a minute!’ called the girl.

‘No, sir, not a half a minute! If you ain’t out here before I count
five I’m going to leave you! One――’

‘Maybe we’d better start along,’ said Tim uneasily. ‘We could come back
later, I guess, and get her, Pud.’

‘Mighty fierce-lookin’ men, they is,’ declared Harmon cheerfully.

‘Four,’ counted Pud, his intervals shortening perceptibly. ‘_Five!_
Back her up, Tim!’

‘Here I am,’ announced Gladys Ermintrude triumphantly. ‘Will you please
take my bag?’

‘No, I won’t,’ growled Pud. ‘Throw it in and jump quick! Let’s go, Tim!
Give her gas!’

Gladys Ermintrude landed somewhat inelegantly in the launch just as
that craft churned away from the shanty-boat and just as a stentorian
hail came across the clearing.

‘_Hey! Where you goin’?_’ shouted a voice.

Pud swung the wheel hard, the _Vengance_ pushed her nose into the
current, and Gladys Ermintrude, jumping to a seat, waved defiantly
toward shore.

‘Ha, ha!’ she cried. ‘At last, villains, I am out of your clutches!
Before dawn the hand of Justice――’

Unceremoniously Pud grabbed a skinny ankle and Gladys Ermintrude
collapsed in a heap. ‘You shut up!’ sputtered Pud. ‘Want us to get
shot? You get down and stay down!’ He was obeying his own order as well
as he could, and so were Tim and Harmon. The launch was picking up
speed now and the shanty-boat was already a length behind, shutting out
of sight the kidnapers for the moment. ‘Give her all there is, Tim!’
called Pud.

‘She’s got it,’ answered Tim. ‘Reckon they’ll shoot?’

‘I don’t know! Keep down, you’d better.’ Pud put his own head up and
looked back. The two men, roughly clothed and bearded desperadoes
indeed, were running hard now, were almost at the bank. As long as they
kept on running, Pud reflected, they couldn’t shoot, and even if they
did shoot they couldn’t do more than pepper the boat as long as they
all kept below the gunwale and――

‘Come back here!’ called an angry voice. ‘Where are you taking that
girl? I’ll have the Law on you!’

‘Oh,’ exclaimed Gladys Ermintrude despairingly, ‘that he should speak
of the Law!’

The other man shouted now, his words coming more faintly as the
distance increased. ‘You Tibbie! You Tibbie Liscomb, you come right
back here! If you don’t I’ll tell your mother the minute――’

The rest was lost in the noise of the engine and the steady thud of the
propeller. Pud scowled questioningly at the girl crouched beside him.
‘What’s he call you Tibbie for?’ he demanded suspiciously. ‘And how’s
he going to tell your ma if――’

‘He does it to humiliate me,’ answered the girl bitterly. ‘They both
called me Tibbie. Ah, well, it’s over now!’ She sighed deeply and
turned a look of gratitude on Pud. ‘My preserver!’ she whispered. ‘Had
it not been for you, who knows what awful fate were mine! Never, never
can I thank you enough, my brave――’

‘Aw, cut it,’ growled Pud. ‘And you’d better wipe the end of your nose.
You’ve got engine grease on it.’




                              CHAPTER IX

                                PURSUIT


The shanty-boat, the sagging wharf, and the waving men grew small in
the distance. The forest closed in once more. At last the clearing
passed from sight as the launch, chugging determinedly, rounded a
shadowed bend in the river. Pud and Tim sighed with relief. Harmon,
as solemn as an owl, perched on the stern and stared curiously at
Gladys Ermintrude. The girl, preparatory to her flight, had somehow
struggled into a very tight sweater of a deep orange shade which,
beyond the shadow of a doubt, harmonized sadly with her tanned face
and copper-hued hair. She had brought with her an ancient satchel
encompassed, at one end, by a rusty-black strap and at the other a
piece of clothes-line. It was the satchel that again aroused Pud’s
sleeping suspicions.

‘Say, if you were kidnaped,’ he asked, ‘how’d you happen to bring all
your clothes along with you?’

‘Sakes alive!’ exclaimed Gladys Ermintrude. ‘Why, those aren’t _all_ my
clothes! Why, I’ve just got a few simple things in the bag, hardly a
change of attire.’

‘Just the same,’ persisted Pud, ‘if you were kidnaped――’

‘Gosh,’ expostulated Tim, who, being somewhat susceptible to feminine
charm, chivalrously disapproved of Pud’s incredulous attitude, ‘why
wouldn’t she take some duds with her?’

‘Well, because as a usual thing kidnaped folks don’t have time to pack
bags. When you kidnap a person, you just grab him quick and throw him
into a――an automobile and beat it!’

‘You don’t understand,’ said Gladys Ermintrude in a somewhat superior
manner that increased Pud’s growing dislike. ‘You see, they came for me
when I was all alone in the house, and after they had bound me up and
thrown me helpless on――on the floor――’

‘Gosh!’ muttered Tim.

Harmon chortled, whether from horror or delight it would have been
difficult to say.

‘They got the bag and made me tell them what to put in it,’ continued
Gladys Ermintrude. ‘But, sakes alive, I simply couldn’t think of
half the things I really needed, and I came away without my negligee
and――oh, several other things. I really don’t see how I managed to get
along as well as I did!’

‘Well, then,’ said Pud, ‘what did they do it for?’

The girl’s eyes opened wide. ‘Why, for the reward, of course!’

‘Sure,’ assented Tim. ‘Folks always offer rewards, Pud.’

Pud looked unconvinced. ‘I wouldn’t,’ he said, eyeing Gladys Ermintrude
with no enthusiasm. Then: ‘Who were those men?’ he asked.

‘They were’――the girl’s gaze wavered momentarily――‘they were a Mr.
Liscomb and――’

‘But that’s your name!’ exclaimed Tim.

‘Yes,’ she agreed. ‘He’s my uncle. The tallest one, I mean.’

‘Oh, shucks!’ said Pud. ‘You can’t be kidnaped by your own uncle! Gee,
I knew there was something queer about it!’

‘You can, too,’ responded the girl indignantly. ‘I guess an uncle can
be just as――just as villainous as any one. You don’t know my uncle Asa!’

‘Who’s the other one?’ asked Pud.

‘Uncle Asa’s brother. His name’s William.’

‘Well, he’s your uncle, too, isn’t he?’ demanded Pud impatiently.

‘No, he’s not.’

‘Well, but, gee, he’s got to be! If he’s your uncle’s brother, he’s
your uncle, too. Isn’t he, Tim?’

‘Well,’ began Tim hesitantly. But at that moment Harmon broke in
with the warning announcement that there was a boat coming down the
river, and the matter of relationship was dropped. Pud viewed the still
distant craft and decided on discretion.

‘They might see you and tell your _uncles_,’ he said to the girl,
emphasizing the last word triumphantly. ‘You sit down here and I’ll
throw the end of the tent over you till they get by.’

‘It isn’t “they,” it’s “him,”’ answered Gladys Ermintrude. ‘It’s Pete
Minger, and he’s going after them.’

‘After those――after your uncles?’

She nodded cheerfully. ‘They’re going farther down the river. Pete’s
going to tow them. He’s sort of late and――’

‘He’s coming like the dickens,’ exclaimed Tim admiringly. ‘Gosh, that
boat goes, don’t it?’

Pud hastily pushed the seemingly unwilling girl to a position beside
the tent and drew a corner of a flap over her. ‘You keep still,’ he
warned her. There was a smothered response that sounded rebellious.
‘You scrooch down, too, Harmon. We don’t want any trouble, I guess. You
sort of turn your back, Tim.’

The oncoming launch bore down fast. In the stern lolled a
disreputable-looking individual in a torn khaki shirt, hatless, smoking
a pipe. He waved carelessly as he passed, but Pud saw that he was
plainly interested in the _Vengance_. Even after he had passed, he kept
his gaze upstream for several minutes.

‘All right,’ said Pud finally, throwing off the tent flap. ‘You can get
up now.’

Gladys Ermintrude arose with a very red countenance and sneezed several
times. ‘I don’t see,’ she announced vindictively, ‘what you had to do
that for. I guess my――those awful men saw the name on this boat, and I
guess Pete Minger saw it, too. So what sense was there in putting me
under that horrid, smelly old tent, I just wish you’d please tell me?’

‘Gosh, that’s so,’ agreed Tim. Pud, feeling rather foolish, merely
looked haughty and made no answer. Tim went on, a tone of uneasiness
in his voice, ‘Look here, Pud, suppose those men――those uncles, you
know――I mean those one uncle and――’

‘Oh, get on with it,’ interrupted Pud.

‘Well, suppose they get this fellow, Pete Something, to take them in
his launch and come after us?’

‘Suppose they do?’

‘Well, my goodness, it’s a heap faster than this boat! They’d catch us
in no time! And, gosh, Pud, if they did catch us, I guess they’d be
pretty mad and I don’t know what would happen!’

‘No more do I,’ said Pud gloomily. ‘But it was your idea, this rescue
business. _I_ didn’t want to do it. _I_ didn’t――’

‘I do believe that’s just what they’ll do,’ broke in the girl
excitedly. ‘Isn’t it just thrilling? That launch of Pete Minger’s is
the fastest thing on the river, I guess!’

‘You seem mighty pleased about it,’ said Pud bitterly. ‘I dare say you
don’t care a bean if we get plugged full of bullets!’

‘I do, too, but they haven’t got any bullets. It’s just bird-shot.
Anyway, they probably won’t catch us.’

‘Why won’t they?’ demanded Tim eagerly.

‘Because it’s getting pretty dark, and if we go up Fish-Hawk Creek and
hide under the bushes, I guess they won’t find us.’

‘Fish-Hawk Creek?’ inquired Pud. ‘Where’s that?’

‘Just a short distance. It’s the first creek you find. I think I can
tell when we get to it. I’ve been there lots of times with my――with
friends.’

‘Kidnaped, I suppose,’ said Pud sarcastically.

‘Aw, Pud!’ begged Tim.

Just then came a pathetic voice from the shadowy figure of Harmon in
the stern. ‘Ain’ we goin’ have no supper?’ he asked.

It came to Pud and Tim instantly that they were very, very hungry, but
Pud shook his head. ‘Got to wait till we land,’ he declared. Tim sighed
deeply and Harmon relapsed into a melancholy silence. Pud yielded the
wheel to Tim and tried to add to the boat’s speed, but no amount of
oiling or coaxing made any difference. The _Vengance_ plodded doggedly
along at some four miles through the growing darkness while Pud, gazing
back down the dim stream, watched for pursuers. Presently he broke
into a conversation between Tim and Gladys Ermintrude with: ‘How much
farther’s this creek?’

The girl, recalled to her responsibilities, looked about her a moment.
Then, ‘Sakes alive,’ she exclaimed in surprise, ‘I do believe we’ve
gone by it! Didn’t you see a little opening on that side a few minutes
ago?’

‘No, I didn’t!’ answered Pud shortly. ‘Are you sure we’ve passed it?’

‘We-ell, I’m not absolutely――Yes, I am, too! There’s Peacher’s Bend
right up there where the two tall pines stick up, and Fish-Hawk Creek’s
a quarter of a mile below that. My, weren’t we stupid to go by it?’

‘Weren’t _we_ stupid!’ echoed Pud disgustedly. ‘I thought you were
going to tell us when we got to it! Gee, I never saw a girl yet who
was any good in a pinch! What’ll we do now? Is there another creek
anywhere near?’

‘No, there isn’t. Not for more than two miles, I guess. And I don’t
think you’re very polite to your guests to talk like that! I’m sure if
I was running this boat――’

‘Well, you aren’t,’ snapped Pud crossly. ‘And I’m going to turn back,’
he added defiantly.

‘We-ell,’ muttered Tim, ‘if you think we’d ought to――’

‘Well, gee, if we don’t those fellows will catch us easy, won’t they?
_Some one’s_ got to decide _something_, I should think! We can’t _all_
spend our time just _talking_! You take the engine and I’ll see if we
can turn around without hitting the bank.’

They could and did and then Pud ran the launch as close as he dared
to the left-hand bank and went slowly back downstream in search of
the mouth of Fish-Hawk Creek. It was too dark now to see anything
distinctly save the steely ribbon of river where the last of the
daylight reached it through the walls of forest. Pud’s spirits were
getting very low. They usually did get low if he went much beyond his
accustomed time for food. He was taking some slight pleasure in a
mental picture of Gladys Ermintrude walking the plank when something
leaped into his vision far down the stream. More than once already he
had imagined just such an object, but this time it wasn’t imagination.
Harmon saw it, too, and remarked the fact with melancholy alacrity.
And then they all saw it and for a moment nothing was said aboard the
launch. Then it was the girl who broke the eloquent silence.

‘Sakes alive!’ she giggled. ‘Isn’t this just too dramatic?’

‘If you weren’t a girl,’ began Pud between his teeth.

‘Gosh,’ murmured Tim, ‘I guess we’re in for it!’

‘Can’ do nothin’ to me,’ announced Harmon defiantly. ‘I ain’ kidnup
nobody!’

‘If we could only find that creek!’ muttered Pud.

The other boat was coming fast, fairly eating up the space between, and
now they could hear very plainly the steady _plup-plup_ of her exhaust.
Pud desperately wondered if, should they stop and huddle close to the
bank in the shadows, they could escape being seen. Then a wiser plan
came to him and his spirits rose buoyantly.

‘I’m going right on past ’em,’ he announced. ‘They won’t be looking for
us to come this way, and they won’t suspect, I guess, when they see
the name on the bow isn’t the same! You get down and cover yourself
up, Gladys Evinrude. You see that she don’t show, Tim. Harmon, you
scrooch down on the bottom and stay there. You sit up here with me,
Tim. Make-believe you’re asleep. Put your arms on the――That’s it! Here
they come! Every one keep still and, no matter what happens, don’t say
a word or make a sound!’

The two launches drew nearer and nearer, Minger’s boat in mid-stream,
the _Jolly Rodger_ close to the bank. Pud leaned carelessly against the
gunwale, trying to express drowsiness by his attitude. Now he could see
that the approaching boat held three forms, one seated and one erect at
the bow, another standing near the middle. Then a strong flash-light
swept across the few yards of intervening water and a hoarse voice
hailed.

‘_Hi, there! Slow down!_’ it commanded.




                               CHAPTER X

                            FISH-HAWK CREEK


The other boat slowed, stopped. Pud pretended not to understand, and
the _Jolly Rodger_ went chugging on, the skipper waving a friendly
hand. But the ruse didn’t work.

‘_Hi, you! Stop that launch!_’ was the order.

Pud shook his apparently slumbering companion. ‘Wake up, Tim,’ he
shouted. ‘Take the wheel!’

Tim groped sleepily for the wheel, yawning loudly, and Pud stepped to
the engine and pushed up the throttle. With the other hand he threw the
clutch out. By the time this was accomplished some forty feet of river
separated the two boats, and the _Jolly Rodger_ was still floating
slowly with the current. The light from the electric torch passed
searchingly along the launch, from stem to stern and back again, to
come to rest finally on Pud. And while it passed the low voices of the
men sounded plainly.

‘That isn’t the one. Look at the name, _Jolly Rodger_.’

‘Well, no, but it looks like it, and――’

‘Besides, there were three of them on the other.’

‘Might be another one somewheres about,’ said the second speaker. Then
a third voice, evidently that of the boat’s owner, spoke.

‘’Tain’t the craft I seen awhile back. _Vengance_ that was called. It
was goin’ up-river, too.’

‘Say,’ called a voice then, ‘did you pass a white launch with three
fellows and a girl in it a while ago?’

‘I saw one farther up the river,’ answered Pud.

‘Notice the name of it?’

‘Why, I don’t know as I did. Did you, Tim?’

‘Yes,’ answered Tim, with another yawn. ‘_Vengance_.’

‘How far up?’ was the next question.

‘Maybe two miles. It was going sort of slow. Well, I’ve got to be
getting on. Good-night.’

‘Good――’ began the voice from the darkness.

‘_Ker-chew!_’ It came from beneath the tent canvas, muffled yet
startlingly loud for all of that! There was a moment of silence on
both boats while the eye of the electric torch raced back and forth
suspiciously. And then:

‘_Ker-chew!_’ This time it was Tim, and the violence of the sneeze
almost took him overboard. The light enveloped him for an instant,
wavered, vanished.

‘Good-night, boys! Much obliged!’

‘Don’t mention it,’ answered Pud faintly.

The other launch churned the water astern and jumped forward again. Pud
pulled the lever toward him and the _Jolly Rodger_ took up her journey.
For a long moment nothing was said on board. Then, from behind the boys
came a sibilant whisper:

‘Have they gone? Can I get up?’

‘Yes,’ answered Pud bitterly, ‘but you mighty near spoiled everything!
What did you go and sneeze for like that?’

‘Well,’ replied Gladys Ermintrude, emerging from the tent flap, ‘I
guess you’d sneeze, too, if you had to keep your head under that dusty
old tent!’ Then her indignation vanished and she laughed softly. ‘My
gracious, didn’t we fool them, though? It was just like ‘The Dangers of
Dorothy’; where the heroine hides in the potato sack and the villains
throw her in the cart and don’t know it! Did you see it?’

‘No,’ said Pud shortly. ‘Say, isn’t that the creek ahead there?’

‘Yes,’ said the girl.

‘All right. I’m going in there a ways and tie up to a bank so’s we can
talk things over. I guess they won’t look for us there.’ There was
a sound of hilarity from the stern and Pud peered back. ‘What’s your
trouble, Harmon?’ he demanded.

‘Nothin’, Mister Pud,’ answered the darky chokingly. ‘I――I’s jus’
laughin’ at the way Mister Tim done fool them folks! ‘Ker-choo!’ he
say, ‘Ker-choo!’ My golly, that was surely one pow’ful lucky sneeze!’

‘Well, you’d better stop that noise,’ grumbled Pud, ‘or they’ll hear
you and come back! Slow her down more, Tim, will you? Gee, this isn’t
much of a creek!’

It wasn’t, so far as width was concerned, but fortunately it was deep
and there were no snags, and Pud made the turn neatly and the launch
went slowly, cautiously forward. Tim got a pocket torch and, standing
beside Pud, explored the banks on either side. Presently they found
what they sought, a place where the launch could be laid close to the
bank and under the drooping branches of a big willow. Better still,
as later developed, there was a cleared space a few yards away from
the creek large enough to hold the tent; for they had by now abandoned
all idea of getting on to Corbin that night. It was already past eight
o’clock, and even aside from the danger of again encountering Pete
Minger’s boat, to make the ascent of the winding stream with no better
illumination than could be supplied by two pocket flashlights would be
a good deal of a hazard. Pud devoutly wished that they had never seen
Gladys Ermintrude, but since she was on their hands they would have to
reckon with her.

Personally, Gladys Ermintrude offered no objections to spending the
night there. On the contrary, she appeared to be greatly taken with
the idea. She said it reminded her of ‘Clashing Souls,’ where the hero
and the heroine were cast away on the desert island. Tim said he was
awfully sorry about it and hoped her poor mother wouldn’t worry too
much. Gladys Ermintrude said she wouldn’t, probably, because this was
choir-practice night, and her mother played the organ, and that would
keep her mind busy; and was she to sleep in the tent, or where?

Pud pointed out gloomily that to light a fire would be tempting
Providence, but he was secretly thankful when he was overruled by the
others, since the prospect of eating cold food was as repugnant to him
as to Tim and Harmon. The latter soon had a small blaze, and presently
there was the cheering fragrance of sizzling bacon. Pud walked along
the bank of the creek a way and returned with the welcome assurance
that you couldn’t see the light of the fire more than about fifty feet
distant.

Gladys Ermintrude sat on the ground close to the blaze and chattered
cheerfully. She said it must be wonderful to be able to cook things
the way Harmon did. Herself, she knew nothing about cooking or any
household duties. Her mother had never allowed her to do any of the
work because it might injure her hands. Besides, with all the servants
they employed, what would have been the sense of it? Oh, of course, she
could make delicious fudge, but that was just play. Cooking and such
household drudgery was all right, she thought, for girls who had no
ambition, but personally she considered it a waste of time. There were
so many more important things, weren’t there?

Tim, the principal recipient of these confidences, said he supposed
there were, but that he guessed it wasn’t a bad idea for girls to
know how to cook a little, because they never could tell when they
might have to. But Gladys Ermintrude laughed lightly. In her own
case, she declared, knowing or not knowing how to cook didn’t matter
a bit, because she meant to live entirely for her Art. Motion-picture
actresses, especially stars――one of which Gladys Ermintrude was to
become shortly――didn’t have to bother themselves with such ordinary
and vulgar affairs as keeping house. They either lived in magnificent
hotels or else they owned beautiful bungalows in California and had
large retinues――Gladys Ermintrude pronounced it ‘retin-wees’――of
servants.

Tim was rather impressed with all this, in spite of the secret
conviction that Gladys Ermintrude was totally unlike any moving-picture
star he had ever seen, and he would have patiently listened to further
particulars regarding her career if Harmon had not announced supper
just then.

That was a most welcome, appetizing, and satisfactory repast. They had
not eaten anything for eight hours or so, and the bacon and scorched
slices of bread that Harmon called toast and the scalding hot tea
vanished rapidly. Even Gladys Ermintrude, while she appeared desirous
of impressing the others with the daintiness of her appetite, did full
justice to everything. She was inclined to be critical of the tea,
explaining that she was accustomed to having lemon with hers instead
of condensed milk, until Pud told her, almost impolitely, that if
she didn’t like what she was getting she needn’t drink it. Gladys
Ermintrude thereupon conquered her distaste and asked for another cup.

Food can do miraculous things sometimes. It did on this occasion. It
vanished Pud’s irritability, smoothed out the anxious lines on Tim’s
forehead, and set Harmon to crooning a song while he cleared away. It
also made them entirely reckless in the matter of the fire. Or maybe it
was more especially the mosquitoes that did that. Anyway, they piled it
high with wood, with apparently no thought for the kidnapers in Pete
Minger’s launch, and basked in its welcome warmth.

Gladys Ermintrude said it was just like the scene in ‘Haunted Souls,’
where the shipwrecked millionaire and his friends made the fire on the
beach and waited for the waves to drown them. Tim retained sufficient
energy to inquire why they wanted the waves to drown them, and Gladys
Ermintrude explained that there was no escape for them because of the
towering cliffs at their back. Tim suggested that they might have
proceeded farther along the beach and found a place where the cliffs
weren’t so towering, but the girl didn’t seem to think that would have
been possible, although she couldn’t explain just why.

‘Say,’ asked Pud, ‘don’t you ever do anything but go to the movies?’

‘Of course, I do,’ answered Gladys Ermintrude. ‘I attend to my social
duties and――and read a great deal; and then, of course, I’m always
studying my Art.’

‘Gee, you must lead a swell life,’ said Pud. ‘What sort of things do
you read? Ever read “The Three Musketeers”?’

‘N-no, I don’t think so. Who wrote it? Mother is very particular about
my reading. I’ve read all of Annabel Smothers’ stories; “Lady Lucia’s
Diamonds” and “Loved and Lost” and――’

‘Slush,’ said Pud.

‘They’re not either! They’re beautiful! Maybe you wouldn’t care for
them; boys don’t, I guess; they can’t――can’t appreciate sentiment.’

‘Huh,’ grunted Pud.

‘Mister Pud,’ interrupted Harmon, ‘does I get me some of that there
reward?’

‘What reward?’

‘What we gets for unkidnapin’ this here girl.’

‘No, you don’t,’ replied Pud. ‘Nobody gets any reward.’

‘How-come?’

‘Because, in the first place, we don’t want any, and, in the second
place, because there isn’t any!’

‘Why!’ gasped Gladys Ermintrude, deeply pained.

‘Ain’ she say her ma goin’ give ten thousan’ dollars for her?’ asked
Harmon, puzzled.

‘Yes, she said so,’ answered Pud, laughing with deep irony, ‘but she
says a lot of things. She says she’s going to be a movie actress!’

‘I think you’re too――too disgusting for words!’ exclaimed the girl. ‘I
_am_ going to be a moving-picture actress! Why, sakes alive, everybody
knows that!’

‘I’ll bet the moving pictures don’t know it,’ laughed Pud. ‘And as for
that reward, any one can have my share for a nickel!’

‘Well, I don’t know,’ objected Tim. Gladys Ermintrude was plainly too
wounded for speech. ‘I don’t see why her folks wouldn’t give something
for her safe return to――to――for her safe return. It generally _is_
done, Pud.’

‘Yes, in stories and movies!’

‘Well, but, wait now! There was a piece in the paper just last winter
where a boy was kidnaped and his father offered a lot of money for him;
I think it was five thousand dollars!’

‘Of course there was!’ declared the girl triumphantly.

‘All right,’ said Pud cheerfully. ‘You go on believing it. To-morrow
you’ll see whether I’m right or wrong. Because to-morrow morning Gladys
Evinrude’s going to be handed over to her ma just as soon as we can
get her there. And now I’m going to bed. You and I’ll sleep in the
boat, Tim, and she can have the tent. Harmon, you bed down here by the
fire. And don’t you go and raise a rumpus on account of any skunk or
anything else, because if you do I’ll sure tan your hide!’

Later, on the edge of sleep, Pud remembered that he had not written his
letter home.




                              CHAPTER XI

                     GLADYS ERMINTRUDE IS RESTORED


Corbin came into sight at a little before nine o’clock the next
morning, a quiet, rambling town of little homes and shaded streets
commanded by a tall red water-tower. The railway touched Corbin on
its way to the coast, and, as the launch drew near the line of small
wharves and landings, there came the shrill screech of a locomotive
bustling in from the north. Just below the town they passed a small
settlement of shanty-boats, many of them hauled high and dry above
the river, others moored to the bank with a plank or two bridging the
gulf between. Harmon looked long and interestedly and finally confided
to Tim that some day he was ‘goin’ to have him one of them there
shunty-bo’ts.’

No one had slept very well the night before; no one, at least, save
Gladys Ermintrude, who declared that she had ‘slumbered divinely.’ Pud
and Tim, who had lain on a combination of one cot and the top of a
locker in the launch, had certainly found nothing divine about their
slumbers, and the fact had left them both a trifle tired and morose
this fine morning. The sight of Corbin had produced in Pud the first
pleasant sensation of the day, and as the launch chugged leisurely up
to a slanting float, beyond which the sign ‘GasOLine, OiL & WaTer’
flaunted from the side of an old shed, the sensation grew. Here they
were to see the last of Gladys Ermintrude!

During the last few miles the girl had become unusually silent, and
a close observer might have suspected her of being slightly worried.
And now, at the landing, she seemed to have lost some of that
self-possession that had served her so admirably during the trying
times just passed. Possibly the joy of being restored to her anxious
parents affected her. When the launch had been made fast, she was all
ready to disembark, her colorful sweater over her arm and her bag in
hand.

‘Well,’ she said, just a trifle breathlessly, Pud thought, ‘I’m awfully
much obliged to you boys. I shall never forget what you did for me.’

‘That’s all right,’ said Pud unemotionally. ‘How far’s this place where
you live?’

‘Oh, I wouldn’t think of troubling you any further,’ protested Gladys
Ermintrude. ‘I live quite a ways from here. You mustn’t――’

‘No trouble at all,’ replied Pud, climbing out. ‘We don’t mind a walk.’

‘No,’ agreed Tim, ‘we’d like it. Let me take your bag.’

Gladys Ermintrude clung to her bag tightly, though. ‘No, you mustn’t,’
she declared. ‘It wouldn’t look right for me to be seen walking through
town with you boys. And――Mother would be horribly shocked! Thank you so
much!’

‘I guess your mother can stand it,’ said Pud grimly. ‘Come on, Tim.
Harmon, you stick here till we get back.’

Gladys Ermintrude bit her lip as she followed across the wharf, but
presently she appeared to recover somewhat of her wonted composure
and allowed the gallant Tim to take her bag. Then, a step or two in
advance of her escort, she led the way. By the time they had crossed
the main street of the town and were among the modest residences, she
was walking with quite an air. Occasionally she bowed impressively to a
passer or to some housewife engaged in sweeping a tiny front porch. On
such occasions the persons addressed turned in their paths or paused in
their labors to stare long and fixedly after her.

The distance was not great, after all, for they had only walked four
blocks when Gladys Ermintrude paused at a gate in a white picket fence,
smiled gratefully, and held out her hand. ‘Well,’ she announced, ‘I’ll
say good-bye. It has been most kind of you――’

But Pud, who had been observing the house, interrupted coldly. ‘Aw,
come on,’ he said. ‘You don’t live here.’

‘Why, I do, too!’ Gladys Ermintrude stamped her foot in a most
unladylike manner. ‘You give me my bag!’

‘Don’t you do it, Tim. Look at the name on the door; “Hopkins!” And
look at the windows all closed up. Don’t any one live here, I guess.’

‘You mind your own business,’ flared the girl. ‘And you give me my bag
this instant!’

‘_Tibbie! Tib-bie-e-e!_’

Two houses farther along a slight little woman was beckoning from
the porch. The three turned and looked. Gladys Ermintrude’s manner
underwent a remarkable change. She laughed joyously. ‘Why,’ she
exclaimed, ‘there’s Mamma! Hoo-ee, Ma!’

Pud and Tim, the latter’s face an interesting study in bewilderment,
followed the lightly tripping feet of Miss Liscomb. In front of a
tiny buff-painted house, neat, but not at all the mansion of Gladys
Ermintrude’s description, Mrs. Liscomb awaited them, an expression of
mingled relief and uneasiness on her thin, tired face.

‘Well,’ she said as the girl clasped her emotionally, ‘so here you are!
Your pa’s been hunting all up and down the river for you. Now, that’ll
do! I’ve been hugged quite a plenty. You stand still a moment and tell
me what you’ve been up to this time.’

‘Why, Ma!’ said Gladys Ermintrude reproachfully. ‘How you talk! And
right before strangers, too!’

‘Humph,’ said Mrs. Liscomb. ‘Young man, you can set that bag down on
the steps, and then maybe you’d better tell me where you came across
this young lady.’

‘Now, Ma,’ said the girl, ‘I’ll tell you all about everything just as
soon as we’re alone. We mustn’t keep these boys any longer. Oh, dear,
I forgot to introduce you, didn’t I? Ma, this is Pud. I don’t know
his other name. And this is Ted――no, Tim. They’ve been very kind and
obliging. They brought me up the river in their launch, and Ted――Tim
carried my bag for me. Wasn’t that nice of him? And now I guess I’ll
say good-bye――’

‘We rescued her from the kidnapers, ma’am,’ said Pud innocently, ‘and
we’d have had her here before only they chased us and we had to camp
out overnight on a creek down there.’

‘Oh,’ said Mrs. Liscomb, turning a piercing look on her daughter, ‘so
she was kidnaped, was she?’

‘Sakes alive, Ma, can’t you take a joke?’ giggled Gladys Ermintrude.
‘He’s always joking. He’s just too funny for words!’

Pud scowled. ‘How big is the reward, ma’am?’ he asked.

‘Reward?’ faltered Mrs. Liscomb.

‘Well, I think I’ll take my bag in and――and――My, how very tired I am!’
And Gladys Ermintrude hurriedly faded from the picture.

Mrs. Liscomb heaved a sigh. Then she said: ‘Come up on the porch,
please, and tell me just what happened. You look real tired yourselves.’

Pud, occasionally aided by Tim, gave a brief but succinct narrative
of events, and at intervals Mrs. Liscomb nodded and at intervals she
sighed.

‘Of course,’ said Pud in conclusion, ‘I knew there wasn’t any reward.
We didn’t come for that, ma’am. But what I’d like to know is was she
really kidnaped?’

‘No, she wasn’t. I’m so sorry about it all, because you were dear
to take all that trouble. I might as well explain, first off, that
Tibbie――’

‘Is that really her name?’ asked Tim.

‘Her name is Isabel, but we’ve always called her Tibbie.’

‘Gosh, she said it was Gladys Ermintrude!’

‘I dare say. She――she says a great many things that aren’t so,’ sighed
Mrs. Liscomb. ‘Sometimes I call them just plain, out-and-out lies, but
her father says it isn’t that; he says she’s got too much imagination.
She reads an awful lot of trashy books, and just recently she’s gone
perfectly insane about moving-picture shows. Mr. Liscomb says she’ll
get over it as she grows older, but I don’t know. Seems to me she gets
worse instead of better.’ Mrs. Liscomb paused and sighed discouragedly.
Pud pursed his lips and then said judicially: ‘Well, she certainly is a
pretty good imaginater, ma’am!’

‘I do hope it’s no more than that,’ was the troubled reply. ‘She says
she’s “playing a rôle,” whatever that means; something she’s picked up
from those moving pictures, I suspect. She’s just about wore me out. I
did think when she went down-river with her pa and her Uncle Asa I’d
have a minute’s peace. She was wild to go, and while they didn’t want
her, I guess, they took her along because she’s a real handy cook. They
were going fishing and shooting for a week, you know.’

‘Yes’m,’ said Pud. ‘Were those men her father and uncle?’

‘Yes, and of course they were dreadfully upset when Tibbie ran off like
that in a strange boat, and they spent hours going up and down the
river looking for her, and then they came back here about midnight to
see if she’d come home. Mr. Liscomb says he’s going to whip her when he
gets her, but I don’t suppose he will. He’s always saying that, but he
never does it.’

Pud stared into the sunlight as one who sees a vision. ‘I guess,’ he
said earnestly, ‘whipping’s awfully good for children sometimes.’

‘Well, I don’t know. Mr. Liscomb will be back very soon. He went to
telephone to some folks who live down the river a piece. He thought
it might be that Tibbie had gone there. Now don’t you hurry away. Mr.
Liscomb will want to thank you for taking such good care of her!’

But Pud was already on his feet and moving anxiously toward the steps,
and Tim was very close behind him. ‘Yes’m,’ replied Pud hurriedly, ‘but
it wasn’t anything, and we’ve got to be going now. I――we’re awfully
sorry we let her fool us, ma’am, and didn’t know about them being her
father and uncle, because if we had known we wouldn’t have done it, of
course, and I’d like you to tell him so, if you please. And I guess
we’d better be going on now!’

‘Well, I’m sure I’m much obliged to you,’ said Mrs. Liscomb heartily,
as she shook hands with each. ‘And I know Tibbie is, too. Or, if she
isn’t, she ought to be. I guess she’ll be right ashamed of herself,
too.’

‘Yes’m,’ agreed Pud, his gaze fixed uneasily in the direction of the
business section. ‘Yes’m. Well, that’s all right. We were glad to do
it――I mean――Well, good-morning, ma’am!’

At the gate, with no backward glance from even Tim in the hope of
one last fleeting glimpse of Gladys Ermintrude, the boys turned to
the right and walked briskly away. They believed that the returning
Mr. Liscomb would approach from the other direction, and neither Pud
nor Tim was anxious to meet him. It might be, as Mrs. Liscomb had
suggested, that he would thank them, but, recalling the events of the
past eighteen hours, they had their doubts!

They didn’t say much as they made their way as inconspicuously as
possible back to the boat. Once Tim remarked in the tone of one who at
last finds the solution to a puzzling problem:

‘Remember when she said her uncle’s brother wasn’t her uncle? Well, he
wasn’t. He was her father.’

‘About the only time she told the truth,’ grunted Pud.

A little later Pud asked unkindly: ‘What are you aiming to do with
your share of the reward, Tim? Let’s see; a third of ten thousand
dollars――’

‘Aw, shut up,’ muttered Tim.

They found Harmon asleep on the after seat, one bare black leg crooked
over the gunwale. When awakened, he accepted the announcement that
there was to be no reward coming his way with admirable philosophy.
‘Reckon we’s goin’ have plenty money when we sack a town, ain’ we,
Mister Pud? Where-at’s ’at town?’

As much as they desired to cast off and put space between them and the
grateful Mr. Liscomb, they were obliged to transact certain business
before doing so. Oil was needed, for one thing, and food for another.
They had spoken carelessly before starting the trip of eating a great
deal of fish, and in consequence they had not stocked heavily with
meat. Now, save for a small residue of bacon and a single can of baked
beans, the larder was bare of what might be termed the foundations of
a meal. It was decided to replenish here and now, since, whether they
went farther upstream or returned down it, there was no other town of
size for many miles. Pud got his oil and then carelessly suggested to
Tim that the latter could do the shopping if he liked. Tim showed no
gratitude for the favor. They debated sending Harmon to the stores,
but in the end they concluded to go together. After all, Mr. Liscomb
would be quite as likely to find them at the landing as in the town,
and if they had to listen to his expressions of gratitude, perhaps it
would be better to do so where there was plenty of room in case Gladys
Ermintrude’s father became too earnest.

Pud took the remains of the ten-dollar bill, which had been provided
for current expenses and which had been broken at the gasoline station
at Livermore, from its hiding-place, and they returned to the business
street of the town, Harmon once more being left in charge of the
launch. They purchased fresh meat and bacon and bread and a dozen
bananas and a box of cookies, and then Pud, reflecting on the advantage
of having small bills handy, proffered a five-dollar note. It was a
surprisingly new and crisp note to have been through the pocket of a
gasoline supply man. The grocer who accepted it seemed to be thinking
something of the sort, for he turned it over and peered at it closely
for several seconds. Then he fixed Pud with a stern look and asked:

‘Where’d you get this bill, hey?’

Pud told him. The grocer again turned it over, again studied it. Then,
with no further words, he walked from behind the counter and laid a
firm hand on Pud’s shoulder.

‘You come along with me,’ he said. ‘This bill may be all right, but it
don’t look it, and I’ve been stung twice already.’

Pud hung back. ‘Where do you want me to go?’ he asked.

‘To the bank, young man. It ain’t but four doors from here. I don’t
like the slick look of this bill, and I’m going to have Jim Knowles
pass on it afore I take it.’

‘Oh, all right,’ said Pud, ‘but there isn’t anything wrong with it,
I tell you.’ Nevertheless, he was beginning to have doubts of the
bill himself. It _was_ awfully neat and crisp, while most of the
paper currency that circulated thereabouts was quite the contrary.
And he recalled Mr. Ephraim Billings’s statement of a week before. A
counterfeit bill, Mr. Billings had stated, looked just like a good
one. And that was just what this bill looked like! Pud, as he walked
docilely beside the grocer to the door of the Corbin National Bank,
wondered if the penalty for trying to pass counterfeit money was very
heavy. Tim accompanied them, looking greatly worried. They had to stand
in line for a minute before the wicket. Finally, though, the man behind
it was looking inquiringly from the bill to the grocer.

‘Well,’ he snapped impatiently, ‘what you want I should do with this,
Henry?’

‘Want you to look at it.’

‘I am a-looking at it. What’s wrong with it?’

‘Looks sort of funny to me, Jim. Thought maybe it was phoney. I got
stung twice just recent, like you know, and――’

‘Pshaw!’ The man behind the wicket thrust the bill back irritably. ‘I
told you twenty times how to tell those counterfeit notes, Henry. Use
your brains! I told you――’

‘All right, all right! This is O.K., is it? Then suppose you give me
five ones for it, Jim.’

Jim did so, sourly, and the three returned to the store, the grocer
apologetic, Pud and Tim much relieved.

‘You see,’ said the storekeeper as he made the change from the cash
register, ‘there’s a lot of queer money been circulating around this
part of the State recently. Tens and twenties, though I ain’t seen any
of the twenties. About a fortnight ago two men came in here and bought
nearly four dollars’ worth of goods and gave me a ten-dollar bill. It
was a mighty nice-looking bill and I put it aside so’s to have it in
case I was to need a nice crisp ten. Well, sir, when that bill went to
the bank――happened I didn’t pay it out again――that feller we were just
talking to took and stamped “Counterfeit” right across it four or five
times! And, by Jupiter, I was out ten dollars!’

‘That was hard luck,’ said Pud, reaching for his bundles.

‘Wa’n’t it? And then again, about a week after that, it happened again.
That time it was Clay Moody, the garage man, paid me. He never could
remember where he got it. Anyway, you see we’ve got to be careful, and
that’s why I was doubtful about that bill you handed me. It looked
awful pretty. Well, if it ain’t all right,’ he chuckled, ‘I don’t need
to worry. And, by Jupiter, I wouldn’t feel any too blamed sorry if it
_was_ bad, seeing Jim Knowles was so tarnation snippy!’

They got back to the launch without further misadventure, and without,
fortunately, so much as sighting the grateful Mr. Liscomb. Ten minutes
later they were in the stream, bound up-river to a place known as ‘The
Flat,’ where the bass lived. The Flat had a Statewide reputation as a
fishing ground, and, although they were now supplied with enough fresh
meat for one repast, they all agreed that a nice fried bass would touch
the spot as nothing else could!




                              CHAPTER XII

                            MOSTLY FISHING


With Harmon at the wheel, closely watched by an anxious Tim, Pud
settled himself at the stern and wrote a letter to his mother.
Despairing of being able to narrate all the happenings of the past
forty-eight hours, he decided to narrate none, or almost none. When
completed, the letter conveyed hardly more than the bald information
that they had spent Tuesday night at Aunt Sabrina’s, that they had
bought some more food supplies, that they were now on the way up
the Fox River to fish for bass, and that they were all well. Elated
by the escape from Gladys Ermintrude and by this recent performance
of his duty, Pud dug out the damp and crumpled pirate emblem and
once more displayed it from the stern. Tim viewed the flaunting
skull-and-cross-bones doubtfully, but Harmon grinned approval,
accepting it as evidence that the piratical life was at last about to
begin.

The Flat, a marsh-bordered lake formed by the junction with the river
of Two-Pond Run and Turtle Creek, was nearly a mile long and about half
a mile wide. It held two small islands and was in most places bordered
by rushes and pond weeds. Beyond The Flat, Fox River bore to the
right for three miles and was there joined by the Little Fox. Between
Two-Pond Run and the Fox, northward, lay what was called River Swamp,
a territory of swamp and hummock, twisting waterways, and numerous
ponds. The ponds and streams held many fish, and in season water fowl
congregated there in numbers. It was a favorite hunting ground with the
adventurous, but one needed to know it well in order to navigate its
confusing thoroughfares. Many tales were told of hunters or fishermen
who had lost their way for days amidst that watery labyrinth. Somewhere
beyond the dark cedar swamps and the oak and maple-clad hummocks lay
that community of ill-repute, Swamp Hole, but outsiders were careful
not to approach very closely to it, since it was well known that the
Swamp-Holers considered fishing and hunting in River Swamp a privilege
confined to themselves and had more than once shown resentment at the
incursion of strangers. So thoroughly was this conviction of theirs
respected that few persons throughout the State could boast of having
seen Cypress Lake, a three-mile body of water lying north of Swamp
Hole. Wonderful stories were told of Cypress Lake; of its unfathomable
depths, of the huge fish that lived there, of the mysterious
disappearance of certain bold spirits who had unwisely sought to
explore it. It got its name from a considerable growth of bald cypress
which bordered it, and it was claimed that not for more than seventy
miles farther south could a cypress tree be found again.

Just above Corbin the river narrowed somewhat and the trees gave place
to thickets of alder and witch-hazel and storax. Here and there black
oaks, pond pines, or ash trees formed small islands of verdure above
the level of grassy bog, and occasionally a group of black willows hung
over the water. The launch nosed its way into the unruffled water of
The Flat an hour or so before noon and Pud dropped the little anchor
off the lower end of the nearer island. Already there were a number of
fishermen on hand. One or two occupied skiffs, but most dozed from the
sterns of flat-bottomed punts. Several shanty-boats were in sight where
the river entered and where the absence of weeds offered access to the
shore. Some forty yards away from where the launch had anchored floated
a dilapidated punt occupied by a man and a yellow hound. The man, who
was simply attired in a cotton shirt and a pair of khaki trousers,
and who wore a conical-crowned, broad-brimmed straw hat turned down
over his lean face, glanced at them briefly and returned at once to
his observation of the cork float that depended from the end of a long
bamboo pole. The dog wagged his tail in friendly fashion and sniffed in
their direction. Then he, too, went back to watching the bob.

They had bought a dozen small green frogs on the landing at Corbin,
and now they proceeded to bait up. Neither Pud nor Tim had had any
experience in bass fishing, and at once they were faced by the problem
of depth. They had anchored in about twelve feet of water, and now
whether to put sinkers on or allow their frogs to choose their own
positions below the surface bothered them. Harmon didn’t approve of
frogs, anyway, and was pessimistic from the start.

‘If’n I had me a good ol’ worm,’ he muttered, ‘I’d sure catch me
somethin’, but I ain’ ’spectin’ much of these here hop-frogs.’

Pud and Tim sought to learn how their neighbor’s line was furnished,
but as it remained quietly in the water they failed. Finally Pud
elected to fish without a lead and Tim decided to use one. Harmon, who
was using a home-made rod of his own devising, merely tied some ten
feet of line to the tip, impaled Mr. Frog on a leaderless hook and
dropped him overboard. Then he lay back on the stern seat, cocked
his right leg over his left knee, rested the pole between his first
and second toes and fixed himself for a nap. After that quiet fell
over the scene. The sun was almost overhead and the breeze was of the
faintest. Now and then, acting on the advice of the man from whom they
had purchased the bait, Pud and Tim drew their frogs from the water and
allowed them to take some more air aboard. A half-hour passed. Harmon
was breathing loudly in the stern, fast asleep. Then there came a sound
from the nearby punt. The yellow hound was peering over the stern and
wagging his tail deliriously. The big cork float had disappeared and
the man was gingerly paying out on a taut line. Pud and Tim, forgetting
their own fortunes, watched absorbedly.

Presently the man began to take in on the line, drawing it to him
through a guide at the end of the pole and coiling it between his feet
as methodically and calmly as though a hard-fighting bass was not on
the other end of it. The hound’s excitement increased and he began to
bark ecstatically. If Pud could have barked, he would probably have
joined in with the dog! Then, some ten feet from the punt, something
flashed for an instant in the sunlight. But the fisherman was still
coiling the line between his feet, and now the long pole was bending
at the end and he was shortening his hold on it. Then, while the
water swirled close to the punt, up went the end of the bamboo, a
fat, fourteen-inch bass gleamed in air and disappeared into the boat.
Whereupon the hound, barking more furiously than ever, sprang upon
it, his tail wagging delightedly. The man spoke quietly to the hound,
who promptly backed off; then he unhooked the fish, observed it
appraisingly, rebaited his hook, cast out again, and once more became
motionless. Beside him, the yellow dog again gave all his attention to
the float.

Pud pulled up his line and fastened a lead four feet short of the hook,
for that was where the successful neighbor had his. Tim pulled up and
set his weight back another foot. Harmon slumbered on. The sun got
hotter and hotter, and Pud looked enviously at his neighbor’s broad
straw hat. He and Tim discussed the catch in low tones. Pud thought
it might weigh a pound and Tim said a pound and a half. Anyway, it
proved that there were fish to be caught there. Presently Tim spoke
insinuatingly of food and Pud consulted his watch and agreed that it
would be well to awaken Harmon. Just then, however, his bob acted
queerly and he forgot all about food. The bob nodded at him, first, and
then it started away as though having business at the other side of
the lake. Pud’s eyes grew very round and his hands trembled. Suddenly
the bob stopped traveling and floated tranquilly again. Tim spoke
scathingly.

‘Pshaw,’ he said, ‘why didn’t you strike? He was on there. Bet you he
got your frog!’

‘He wasn’t on,’ replied Pud bitterly. ‘He was just mouthing it. Suppose
I don’t know? Maybe he did get my frog, but――’

Pud was drawing his line out as he spoke.

‘No, he didn’t,’ said Tim. ‘I can see it. It’s still on.’

‘You sure?’ asked Pud anxiously. ‘I don’t see――Oh, yes, there it is!’

He had brought the frog almost to the surface, and suddenly, just as he
was starting to lower it again, there was a bronze-and-silver flash in
the water and things began to happen!

‘He’s on!’ shouted Tim. ‘Hold him!’

‘I am――a-holdin’ him!’ gasped Pud, doing nothing of the sort for the
reason that he had lost his line and it was paying out at a great
rate. All Pud was doing was holding the rod and groping wildly for the
line. He got it finally when it caught about his foot, but by that
time the fish had had a full forty feet of run and was thinking things
over somewhere. Pud disentangled the line and began to reel nervously.
_Click-click-click_――Then _cli-i-ick!_ and out spun the line again!

‘Gee, he must be a whale!’ panted Pud. Tim, in a spasm of nervous
excitement, hopped about behind him.

‘Never mind the reel,’ he sputtered. ‘Get hold of the line and work him
in that way. That’s the ticket! He’s coming!’

‘You――you’d better get your line up out of the way,’ said Pud. ‘He
might get tangled――’

‘It is up! Lookout! Don’t give him slack!’

Something huge broke water a dozen feet away, sending the silvery drops
high in air, and disappeared again with a mighty tug at the line. Pud
yielded a few inches and then recovered them. The captive swerved
toward the stern, circled back again and tried to head away. Suddenly
there was a yelp from Harmon.

‘I got me one!’ he cried. ‘I got me a basses!’

He was still on his back, holding hard to his pole which was buckling
over the edge of the boat.

‘Please, sir, Mister Tim, lay ahold of it till I gets up!’

‘You fool nigger!’ stormed Tim. ‘You’ve gone and got your line tangled
with Pud’s! And he’s got a bass as big as a house on! And if he loses
him――’

‘What you wan’ I should do?’ begged Harmon. ‘Wan’ I should leggo?’

‘Yes! No! I don’t know! Gosh, if we only had a landing-net, Pud! Can
you get him closer?’

Pud’s rod was bending threateningly and Harmon’s maple pole was giving
forth sickening cracking sounds. Beside the launch, the water was
boiling as the fish tugged and dived. Then Tim acted on the impulse.
Leaning far down over the side of the boat, at the risk of a bath, he
seized a line and heaved upward. Over the gunwale and into the launch
came, not one bass, but two!

There was a shout of triumph from Harmon. ‘What I done tell you?’ he
insisted. ‘What I done tell you? I knowed I got me a basses! One of
’em’s mine, ain’ it, Mister Pud? What I done tell――’

‘Shut up,’ commanded Tim breathlessly, ‘and get out of the way. Put
your foot on that one, Pud! Gosh, they’re snarled up so’s we’ll _never_
get ’em off!’

Snarled they were, indeed! Not only in Pud’s line and Harmon’s, but in
Tim’s as well, for he had left his rod leaning against the engine and
the flopping fish had already added his line to the others in which
they were tangled! It took them a good five minutes to unravel the
situation after the two bass had been finally subdued. Pud’s trophy was
a whopper, weighing all of two pounds, while Harmon’s, though fully as
long, lacked in girth and so in weight. In the midst of the excitement
Harmon discovered that one of the frogs had survived the ordeal and was
hopping about underfoot, and with a yell he went after him, catching
one bare foot in a coil of fish-line and coming a cropper against
the fly-wheel. The frog, doubtless completely unnerved by recent
experiences, gave way to panic and disappeared through a hole in the
floor!

All thought of luncheon was gone now. The three went back to fishing,
Pud resolved to duplicate his triumph, Tim determined not to be beaten,
and Harmon hopeful of landing a ‘basses’ as big as Pud’s. They had
lost sight of their solitary neighbor during the recent period of
agitation, but now they discovered him still motionless in the stern of
the punt, as unheeding of their presence as ever. Pud would have liked
to exhibit his catch and call attention to its size, but the neighbor
seemed such an unfriendly chap that he hadn’t the courage. They fished
on for another hour without so much as a nibble, and by that time their
hunger insisted on being attended to. So, while Tim took Harmon’s pole,
the latter prepared a hurried and rather sketchy repast of crackers
and bananas and the last two bottles of tonic, and they ate with their
several gazes fixed sternly the while on the floats. Probably the
preparations aboard the launch reminded the solitary occupant of the
punt that it was time for dinner, for presently he took a tin box into
his lap and fed slices of bread and what looked to be cold bacon to
himself and the dog. He did not, though, try to combine eating with
fishing, but carefully laid aside his pole, coiled his line on the
floor, and hung the frog over the side between gunwale and water.
So far as Pud could observe the man had never once glanced in the
direction of the launch since the latter had arrived on the scene.

After their quick lunch, Pud, Tim, and Harmon went back in earnest to
their fishing, but when the most of two hours had passed without so
much as a nibble, they began to grow impatient. Pud was now on his
third frog, having drowned his second, but the luck supposed to attach
to Number Three failed him. The sun, although somewhat nearer the
western horizon, seemed to glow even more fiercely than at noon. At
last Pud said, _sotto voce_, to Tim: ‘I’m going to ask him where’s a
good place to catch them.’

Tim glanced doubtfully across and shook his head. ‘He’s probably deaf,’
he answered, ‘but you can try.’

Pud tried. ‘Mister, where’s there another place to fish?’ he called.

The man looked across at them slowly and, for a long moment, appeared
disinclined to answer. Finally, though, he spoke in a thin, drawling
voice. ‘There’s right smart o’ fish up to Turtle Pond,’ he said.

‘Where is that?’ inquired Pud.

‘Close on three miles up yander.’ The man waved a hand vaguely. ‘I’d go
there myself if I didn’t have to row. Right good fishin’, up there.’

‘Bass?’ asked Pud.

‘Uh-huh; bass and pickerel. Big ’uns, too.’

‘Do we go up this stream here?’

‘Uh-huh, up Turtle Creek ’bout three miles. Right smart o’ fish up
there.’

They conferred. Pud had meant to inquire as to other fishing localities
here in The Flat, but three miles wasn’t far, and if there were more
fish in Turtle Pond they might as well go there and try it. Besides,
they had already decided to put in another day hereabouts and it would
be well to find a camp-site soon, for the marshy border of The Flat
held little invitation to them. So Harmon pulled up the anchor and,
after several failures, Pud got the motor started. Turtle Creek led
out of The Flat at the far end, and the launch went on past the two
islands and was speedily lost to sight of the man in the punt. As the
_chug-chug_ of the little engine died away, the man pulled up his own
anchor and rowed to where the launch had floated. There he dropped the
anchor back and settled himself again in the stern. As he did so he
winked gravely at the yellow hound, and, while it sounds improbable, it
really did look as if the hound winked back!




                             CHAPTER XIII

                                 LOST!


Turtle Creek proved a shallow stream some forty feet in width at its
outlet. Beyond the mouth the width varied considerably, but, in spite
of an occasional snag or mud spit, there was always plenty of room. The
bottom was plainly in sight, for the water seemed nowhere more than six
feet deep. Because of the many twists and turns, Pud slowed the engine
down and peered watchfully from the bow. Along the banks, not more than
two feet above the stream, the bushes grew high and close, shutting
them away from the slight breeze that had made existence on The Flat
endurable. Tim perspired and protested, fanning himself with his hat.
Of the three Harmon only was content. At intervals smaller streams
flowed into the creek, sometimes hidden by overhanging vegetation,
sometimes in full sight and so considerable as to width as to make it
doubtful to Pud which was the main waterway. Those three miles seemed
like six to them, and it was almost half-past four ere the creek swung
lazily about and unexpectedly revealed a small pond of still, black
water.

In size it was distinctly disappointing, for one could easily have
thrown a baseball across it at its widest place. Connected with it, as
they later discovered, were two other creeks. In shape it was as nearly
round as any pond might be, with low margins and much pickerel-weed to
engage the propeller. Pud voiced disgust, but Tim replied that maybe
it was big enough to hold fish. As for Harmon, he already had his
half-dead frog trailing in the water. It took some searching to find a
depth of more than eight feet, but they finally succeeded and dropped
anchor and went to fishing hopefully.

About six o’clock hope died and Pud and Tim took turns at telling what
they thought of the veracity of the stranger in the punt. Not once had
a hook been nosed at, not once had anything more than a dragon-fly
stirred the placid surface. It was the stillest, most lonesome spot
they had ever seen, and Pud gave it as his well-considered verdict that
there wasn’t a fish there, never had been and never would be. Harmon,
viewing his pathetic bait dubiously and striving to make it show some
sign of life by poking it with a finger, remarked that if he had some
‘good ol’ worms’ he could get results. They fished on half-heartedly
for a while longer and then gave up. Tim was the last to quit, plainly
disgruntled because he alone had failed to land anything.

It was now too late to seek further for a spot on which to spend the
night, and fortunately a really ideal camp-site lay before them in
the shape of a hummock sparsely clad with a few discouraged-looking
pines. It was almost free of undergrowth and carpeted with coarse grass
and brown needles. There was just room for the tent and a fireplace
in front, and after they had finally pushed the bow of the launch to
within jumping distance of dry land they disembarked and proceeded to
make camp. Harmon had to hunt long before he had accumulated enough
wood to carry them along until bedtime, but he succeeded at last, and
soon there was a fragrant fire burning. The two bass were cleaned and
fried, and, as the sun sank behind the marshes to the west, three very
hungry boys squatted down around the fire and had the best meal of the
cruise. They felt far more cheerful after supper, and while Harmon
cleaned up and rebuilt the fire, and while Pud stretched lazily out
on a blanket, Tim fished from the stern of the launch in about three
feet of water and, just as darkness fell, pulled forth a twelve-inch
pickerel. Until he got it to the light of the fire he wasn’t sure
what it was, and feared it might prove to be an eel! His triumph was
expressed loudly and at length, and he would have gone back to the
launch for more pickerel if Pud hadn’t forbidden it!

If Turtle Pond was silent by daylight, so soon as darkness had well
fallen it made up for it by becoming seemingly alive with strange and
mysterious sounds. Two owls held a weird and monotonous conversation
in the near distance, deep-voiced frogs called pessimistically to
each other about the pond, faint squeaks came from the rushes, and in
the bushes twigs snapped and stealthy rustlings were heard. It would
have been worse than idle to have tried to induce Harmon to sleep
outside the tent, and so he was permitted inside without discussion.
Undressing, Pud came on the letter he had written in the morning, still
unmailed, and he sighed discouragedly. In spite of the best intentions
in the world, he had thus far dispatched but one missive to his
parents; and this was the fourth night of their trip!

It wasn’t easy to get to sleep. Conversation languished, died away, and
commenced again. They made plans for the morrow and remade them. One
thing they were unanimous about, and that was to get back to The Flat
as soon as they could. Silence had held the tent for quite five minutes
when Pud again spoke.

‘Say, Tim, I’ll tell you one thing.’

‘What?’ asked Tim sleepily.

‘You won’t ever catch me lying.’

‘Oh, I don’t know,’ the other murmured, ‘you aren’t such a smart liar!’

‘I mean I’m not going to tell lies,’ said Pud energetically. ‘I――I’ve
had my lesson.’

Tim chuckled. ‘Wait till you get home and begin telling about that bass
you caught!’

‘I mean it,’ Pud insisted seriously. ‘Just look at that girl, Gladys
Evinrude! My goodness, Tim, she was enough to cure that fellow in the
Bible, Anna――I forget his name.’

‘Why, she was just――just imaginative, Pud!’

‘Imaginative, my eye! Anyway, you couldn’t believe a word she said, and
if she got that way from reading too many stories I’m going to quit
reading! She――gee, she was the limit!’

‘Oh, I dare say she was all right other ways,’ muttered Tim charitably.
‘Go to sleep, can’t you?’

‘All right. But I’d like to know whether she got that licking!’

They awoke to find the world wet and gray, with a soft, mistlike rain
falling. The difficulty experienced in getting a fire started with only
damp wood for fuel and the consequent wait for breakfast depressed
them. Matters were made no better when they embarked in a boat whose
every surface gleamed with water. They had eaten Tim’s pickerel,
and, since the fire had been weak, eaten it in a somewhat underdone
condition, and Pud had felt squirmy ever since. On the whole it was
a low-spirited trio who set forth through a silver-gray void to find
their way out of Turtle Pond. Twice they thought they had discovered
the outlet and twice they were forced to back hurriedly out of the
entangling weeds. At last, though, they found the stream and headed
safely into it. There wasn’t much to be seen save bedraggled shrubs
along the banks or an occasional clump of trees. The fine rain fell
silently and ceaselessly. They had progressed slowly the matter of a
mile and a half, perhaps, when Harmon broke the depressed silence.

‘Look yonder, Mister Pud,’ he exclaimed. ‘See ’at big tree ’at’s
leanin’ over!’

‘Yes, what about it?’

‘I ain’ see no such tree like ’at when we comes in here.’

‘We-ell, I don’t think I did, either,’ answered Pud, ‘but I guess it
was there.’

The tree in question, seen vaguely through the grayness ahead, leaned
at an angle of some forty-five degrees across the stream, and it did
seem strange that none of them recalled seeing it before. Tim voiced
the growing conviction of all when, viewing it from beneath, he said:
‘This isn’t the way we came up, Pud.’

‘Well, I don’t know,’ replied Pud doubtfully. ‘Maybe that tree fell
over last night.’

‘It might have, but this creek’s different. It doesn’t twist about so
much, for one thing; we’ve been going pretty straight for ’most a mile,
I guess; and it’s deeper; you can’t see the bottom nearly so plain.’

‘Of course not, when it’s raining. What do you say, Harmon?’

‘I reckon we done got los’,’ answered Harmon simply.

‘Lost, my eye! Even if this isn’t the way we came, it’s bound to lead
back to the river. I guess we got mixed up back there and took the
stream that led out of the pond over to the left of where we fished,
Tim. Anyway, the current’s going the way we’re going, and so it must
lead back to the river.’

Tim wasn’t sure that Pud was right about the current, and there was so
little of it that Pud couldn’t prove his assertion until he had stopped
the launch. Then, as it continued slowly on in the direction it had
been going, and as a piece of cardboard dropped over by Tim floated
in the same way, the question seemed decided. Ten minutes later the
stream branched, and Pud, about to choose the left branch as naturally
the correct one, was surprised to find the current flowing toward him
at the mouth. He stopped the boat and they made certain of it. The
left-hand stream flowed into the one they were in. That was puzzling,
since according to their sense of direction the right-hand stream would
lead them farther northward, and they wanted to go south!

They discussed the matter for several minutes while the launch, still
flying a bedraggled pirate flag from the stern, nestled against the
wet bushes. In the end they reached the decision that, for all they
knew, what seemed to them north might well be south. No one could
remember which way they had started from the camping spot. If they had
unwittingly taken the stream leading eastward, what seemed to them to
be north would really be south. If the sun had been shining they could
have solved the riddle easily enough. And so they could had there been
a compass aboard, but a compass was one thing――almost the only thing,
one might have thought――they hadn’t brought along.

It seemed the safest course to follow the current, since as Pud, not
knowing River Swamp, argued, the current must lead toward the river.
They took the right-hand stream and went on. In the course of the next
two miles they passed several smaller waterways, all, they judged,
flowing into the present one, and gradually the stream grew wider.
The engine began to sputter about ten o’clock and, in spite of Pud’s
earnest endeavors to find the trouble, went dead in one cylinder. They
hobbled along for another mile, and then Pud ran up to a bank and sent
Harmon ashore with a line. To alleviate their troubles somewhat the
rain almost ceased and the gray became an opaline whiteness that seemed
to promise clearing.

Striving to recall all that Andy Tremble had told them about the
engine, the two boys started methodically to work. Pud reported a
gasoline tank more than half full. Tim examined the carburetor gingerly
and gave it a clean bill of health. Together they went at the battery
and followed the wires back. Then out came the spark plugs and were
frowned over and cleaned. And finally, being put together again, the
engine displayed no inclination to start until Pud had thrice primed
it. Then it did start half-heartedly and, as before, on one cylinder.
Only, and this they were both certain of, it was now the other cylinder!

They had occupied an hour and had gained nothing, and so the launch
was unmoored and they went on again. Pud scowled at the sound of the
exhaust and he and Tim discussed the possibility of damage from
running on one cylinder. But there appeared nothing else to do but keep
on, and so they kept on. The sun threatened once or twice to break
through, but each time it changed its mind. However, the rain had
practically stopped, and they discarded rubber coats. So far they had
passed no one on their way, nor had they so much as glimpsed a house,
but now, out of the pearly distance, appeared ahead what was without
doubt a human habitation.

‘We’ll stop and ask them where we are,’ said Pud.

The habitation, seen closer, was only a shanty, rickety and unpainted.
A path led to a log which doubtless answered as a landing, although no
boat was in sight. Pud steered the launch to the log and Tim, who had
volunteered for the duty, stepped suspiciously onto it and leaped to
shore. The cabin looked deserted, but a few tattered garments hung on a
line at one side and an axe was buried in a chopping-block close to the
door. So Tim raised his voice and said ‘Hello!’ As there was no answer,
he said it a second time, pausing, undecided whether to knock on the
tightly closed door in front or make his way around to the back. This
time there came an answer, but not of the sort he had expected.

Something that sounded like a hornet sped past him and went whining
off across the stream, and a sharp report came from the bushes behind
the house. Tim, amazed, stood stock-still and stared until Pud’s voice
reached him and galvanized him into action.

‘_Run, you chump!_’ shouted Pud. ‘_They’re shooting at you!_’

Then Tim ran.

He spurned the log altogether and landed half in and half out of the
launch, his feet dangling in the water. Pud jerked at the clutch and
the boat limped on its way. Harmon, reaching up from a place of safety,
pulled the rest of Tim over the gunwale. Pud, at the bow, making
himself as small as possible, peered ahead at intervals and then back
toward the cabin, all the time wondering how it would feel to have a
bullet land between his shoulders. But the next shot went far overhead,
singing past before the short _crack_ of the rifle reached them.
Looking back, Pud saw a lean form in a calico dress and a faded blue
cotton sunbonnet emerge from the bushes at the left of the cabin and
stand for a moment peering after them. She held a long-barreled gun in
one hand while to the other clung a child of three of four years.

‘Gee,’ muttered Pud, ‘a woman!’

There was a throaty chuckle from Harmon. ‘My golly, Mister Tim, I
reckon it was plum’ lucky for you the ol’ man ain’ to home!’ he said.

‘I guess,’ observed Pud, resuming the seat, ‘she didn’t try to hit us.
All she was doing was frightening us off. Maybe she thought we were
revenue officers or sheriffs or something.’

‘Plaguy old frump!’ sputtered Tim, his nerves still unsteady. ‘She
ought to be arrested!’

‘That’s so,’ Pud agreed. ‘We’ll go back and you can make believe you’re
an officer and――’

‘Oh, shut up,’ grunted Tim, coming forth from concealment and staring
vindictively back at the now distant cabin. ‘It’s all right for you to
laugh, Pud Pringle, but you didn’t feel that bullet whiz right past
your ear!’

‘Folks ’roun’ these here parts seems mighty onsoci’ble,’ observed
Harmon. ‘Reckon they done heard we’s pirates, Mr. Pud?’

They reached a second domicile a little later, slightly more
pretentious, having a tumble-down porch across the front, but they
not only did not stop to make inquiries, but they went by in complete
silence save for the unrhythmical coughing of the invalid engine.
Hunger overtook them well short of noon, for breakfast had been an
unsatisfactory meal, and they drew up beside a fairly clear hummock
and had dinner. The steak that they had purchased the day before was
decidedly odoriferous when Harmon drew it forth from a locker and Pud
and Tim viewed it with deep suspicion and with highly elevated noses.
Tim advised throwing it away, but Harmon assured them that it was a
perfectly good piece of meat.

‘Jus’ you-all wait till I scrape it nice an’ wash it, Mister Tim. Why,
my lawsey, ’at ain’ _ol’_, ’at’s jus’ seasoned!’

It certainly tasted delicious when, Harmon having cut it into three
portions in the hot frying-pan and laid a portion on as many tin
plates, they sampled it doubtfully. Tim was exceedingly glad his advice
had not been acted on. They had boiled potatoes and some rather stale
bread and much steaming hot tea with the steak, and they ended up with
cake and bananas. And after that no one appeared to be in any hurry to
go on. Pud hazarded the opinion that they had accomplished about seven
miles since morning, even allowing for stops and the disabled engine,
but Tim’s judgment knocked off a mile. Both agreed, though, that they
ought to reach the river very soon.

Tim rescued a piece of scorched paper from the edge of the fire and,
with a burnt stick, drew a map purporting to prove conclusively that
the river when found would be the Little Fox. But as his lines were
not very clear, and as the same applied to his explanation, Pud was
unconvinced. Pud believed they would come out first of all on Two-Pond
Run somewhere south of Swamp Hole and would have to go down Two-Pond
Run a considerable distance before they arrived back at The Flat.

‘The way it looks to me,’ he said, ‘we’ve been sort of circling around,
first west and then north, and now kind of west again, and if that’s
right we’re bound to come into Two-Pond Run pretty quick.’

‘Please, sir, Mister Pud,’ said Harmon earnestly, ‘don’ you-all take me
nigh that there Swump Hole. They ain’ got no use for colored folkses
roun’ there, sir!’

‘Well, I guess we won’t get very close to it,’ replied Pud.

But his voice lacked conviction, and Harmon continued to look troubled.
As Pud and Tim could not make their theories agree, they gave up the
attempt after a while and the voyage was continued. The stream was now
more than twice as wide as it had been at Turtle Pond and there were
occasional indications of a stronger current. The launch, in spite of
its handicap of one cylinder, was making appreciably better time. The
stream took on many turns, some of them surprisingly abrupt, and Pud
had his hands full. At last, without warning, the stream ceased to be
and they were out on a long and narrow lake whose farther end was lost
in gray mist. Silent and unruffled, it stretched away between wooded
shores. Across from them, to the right, a close forest of trees formed
a dark wall. Sparsely clothed at their tops with feathery green, their
long straight trunks descended into the dark water, there bulging out
hugely. Pud, having silenced the motor, turned to Tim, beside him.

‘Know where we are?’ he asked in a strangely small voice.

Tim shook his head, staring about him uneasily.

‘Cypress Lake,’ said Pud.




                              CHAPTER XIV

                            ON CYPRESS LAKE


The launch floated out into the lake, only the ripples from its bow
marring the flat monotony of the glassy surface. About them on every
side were silence and solitude, uncanny in their completeness. The gray
mist filled the distances and hung wraith-like about the borders. No
fish broke water, no bird called from the enclosing forest. Behind them
the outlet of the creek was already losing its identity, ahead the lake
stretched away like a broad river, between straight lines of shore,
nowhere more than a quarter of a mile in width, until its somber water
became lost in the mist.

‘Golly, if this ain’ jus’ about the mos’ lonesomest place I ever seen!’

Harmon was the first to break the silence, causing Tim to start
nervously.

‘Well,’ said Pud, attempting a business-like tone, ‘there’s one thing
certain. We don’t want to camp around here! And, even if the fish are
as big as they say they are, I’m not hankering for any of them!’

‘I guess,’ said Tim, looking distastefully at the water about, ‘the
only things that would live in this lake would be eels and horn-pouts.
Gosh, it’s a creepy old hole, ain’t it? Let’s get out.’

‘Yes, but how?’ asked Pud. ‘I mean where? There’s no sense bucking
that current all the way back to Turtle Pond. I suppose there’s a way
out if we can find it. It’s probably up at the farther end somewhere.
Generally lakes are like that. It’s only about twenty to four, and
so we’ve got plenty of time. Wouldn’t you think there’d be some one
fishing here, some one we could ask, eh?’

‘No,’ replied Tim decidedly, ‘I wouldn’t. I wouldn’t fish here for
fifty dollars.’

‘You wouldn’t probably catch fifty dollars if you did,’ said Pud, in a
weak attempt at a joke. ‘Well, let’s start her up again and see if we
can find the way out.’

Thirty minutes later they were about twenty feet from where they
had been when Pud made the above proposal. In other words, the
_Kismet_――_Jolly Rodger_――_Vengance_ simply refused to budge. They
did all the usual things and a great many novel ones; and they turned
the wheel over and over until every one’s back ached. For once
even Harmon’s magic failed. To add to the unpleasantness of their
predicament, the rain began to drizzle down again and they went back
to rubber coats; and every one knows what awkward affairs rubber coats
can prove in such circumstances. Every time Tim leaned down to give the
fly-wheel another hopeless revolution he stepped on a corner of his
coat and so only succeeded in turning the wheel halfway. With the rain
came another degree or two of dimness, a sort of gray twilight that
added to the depression of their spirits. They sat themselves down on
the wet seats and stared at the engine which, now once more yellow with
rust, seemed to stare malignantly back. Finally Tim spoke, bitterly and
accusingly.

‘Your father never ought to have let us start out in a boat like this,’
he said.

Pud turned upon him angrily, started to make a retort, and closed his
lips resolutely. Some things were too absurd to deserve an answer! Tim,
still gloomily regarding the two rusty cylinders, went on.

‘If you’d only had sense enough to bring a pair of oars we could have
rowed back,’ he announced.

Pud laughed harshly. ‘Oh, sure,’ he agreed with deep sarcasm. ‘That
would be easy, wouldn’t it? With no oar-locks! And against that
current! And the stream so narrow in places――Oh, shut up! You make me
tired!’

Tim turned a slightly startled gaze to his chum. He hadn’t suspected
that Pud was getting angry. After all, it was a mean thing to crab. It
wasn’t Pud’s fault. Tim arose apologetically and turned the wheel over
four times. Then he seated himself again across from Pud and said: ‘I
guess you’re right. Oars wouldn’t be any good.’

‘Of course they wouldn’t,’ said Pud, slightly mollified. ‘I guess the
only thing to do is take no notice of that blamed engine for a while
and then try again. Motor-boat engines are queer things, and sometimes
they come around all right if you pay no attention to ’em.’

‘If we had us a good ol’ pole,’ said Harmon, ‘we could get us out o’
here, I reckon.’

‘There’s the boat-hook,’ suggested Tim, ‘if we haven’t lost it.’

‘It’s here,’ announced Harmon, ‘but it ain’ long enough. Reckon this
here’s mighty deep water.’

‘I’ve heard folks say there wasn’t any bottom at all some places,’ said
Tim awedly.

‘Pshaw, that’s foolishness,’ replied Pud. ‘If there wasn’t any bottom
how’d the water stay in here? But a pole wouldn’t get us very far. Even
if we had three poles we wouldn’t reach the end of the pond before
dark. No, sir, if we can’t get the engine going we’ll just have to
spend the night right where we are.’

A depressed silence greeted the announcement. Then Tim remarked, ‘Well,
I’d a heap rather stay here than go ashore!’

‘Oh, I guess nothing would hurt us,’ said Pud with assumed cheerfulness.

‘I ain’ goin’ ashore,’ declared Harmon emphatically. ‘No, sir, I ain’!
There’s hants and ghos’es ’roun’ here, Mister Pud.’

‘Oh, shucks, Harmon! You shut up about your ghosts. I’ve told you there
isn’t any such thing as a ghost, haven’t I?’

‘Yes, you done tol’ me all right, Mister Pud, but you ain’ never seen――’

‘That’ll do for you!’ said Pud sternly. ‘Gee, as if we didn’t have
enough trouble without you always raking up your old ghosts and haunts!’

Silence followed. The rain lessened, became a mist once more, almost
ceased. The lake lightened perceptibly. Pud looked at his watch. It was
now twenty-five after four. ‘Let’s eat some crackers,’ he suggested.
‘Then we’ll try her again.’

The crackers were all right, but they produced a thirst, and there was
nothing drinkable aboard save condensed milk. Tim absolutely refused
to drink the lake water at first, but, after Pud and Harmon had both
pronounced it warm but sweet, he yielded and quenched his thirst,
predicting, though, that it would probably give him typhoid fever and
result in his untimely death. To which gloomy prophecy Pud replied
that, as they had all drank it, they would probably die together.

Cheered and invigorated by the modest repast, they returned to another
prolonged argument with the engine, an argument that proved entirely
one-sided and left them about where they had started. At intervals it
misted, and steadily the desolate scene about them grew dimmer and more
mysterious as evening approached. Harmon, when not taking his turn at
the fly-wheel or performing one of a half-hundred commands made by Pud
and Tim, spent his time staring apprehensively at the nearer shore,
where, as the darkness crept stealthily forth from the thick woods, the
mist that hung along the margin made for his willing imagination weird
shapes and shadows. At last they acknowledged defeat, and, rather than
drift to the shore during the night, Pud tossed over the anchor. The
splash of it awoke a dozen echoes from the shores. Out and out went
the light line, the boys staring in astonishment. Then, with a jerk,
it stopped because there was no more of it, and still it descended
straight from the bow.

‘Gee,’ muttered Pud, ‘there’s thirty-six feet of it, and that anchor
hasn’t touched!’

‘I told you there wasn’t any bottom!’ exclaimed Tim, drawing uneasily
away from the edge of the launch.

‘Pshaw, thirty-six feet isn’t so deep for a lake,’ muttered Pud.

‘It isn’t? I’d like to know where there’s a lake up our way that’s more
than twenty!’

‘Well, what of it? This isn’t up our way. I guess there are lakes out
West and up in British Columbia and――and Alaska that are hundreds of
feet deep! Well, anyway, there’s no use leaving it out, I guess. Might
as well pull it up again, eh?’

‘No, leave it there,’ said Tim. ‘If we drift into shallower water it
will catch and hold us. Gosh, Pud, we can’t be more than eighty feet
from that shore there. Think of the water being as deep as it is! Must
go down mighty sudden, eh?’

‘Yes, it must slope right off. Say, you’d get awfully fooled if you
went in bathing over there and started to wade out, wouldn’t you?’ Tim
agreed, with a shudder, that you would! ‘Gee, I wish it would stop
raining――or something!’ continued Pud, staring disconsolately about
him into the gathering twilight. ‘It’s going to get dark awfully early
to-night, Tim. Maybe we’d better be thinking about something to eat
pretty soon. We can have some canned beans――’

‘Cold?’ asked Tim without enthusiasm.

‘Well, we can’t make a fire on board, can we? I say, though, where’s
that stove of dad’s?’

‘In the bag there, but you have to have alcohol for it, don’t you? And
we haven’t got any, have we?’

‘That’s so. I meant to get some, but forgot it. Well, we’ll just have
to eat cold food for once. Unless’――he winked at Tim then――‘we let
Harmon go ashore and cook something.’

‘No, sir, Mister Pud, I ain’ goin’ to!’ wailed Harmon. ‘Mister Pud,
please, sir, don’ you-all make me!’

‘He’s just fooling,’ said Tim hastily. ‘I guess cold beans will be good
enough. I’m not much hungry, anyway.’

‘You will be before you go to bed,’ said Pud. ‘Harmon, you see what
we’ve got to eat there. My goodness, I wish we could just have some hot
tea! I’m wet right through.’

‘It’s getting cooler, too,’ murmured Tim. ‘I’ll bet it’ll be awfully
cold on this lake before morning, Pud. I wish――’

‘I hears a boat!’ said Harmon in a hoarse whisper. ‘Yander, Mister Pud,
up-lake! You lis’en an’――’

‘Well, shut up so I can listen then. That’s right! I can hear the
oars!’

‘You reckon they’s bogey-mens?’ asked Harmon.

‘I hear voices,’ said Tim. ‘Shall we shout?’

‘I guess we’d better wait,’ said Pud doubtfully. ‘They’re coming this
way.’

The sound of oars was plainly heard now, and once or twice a voice
came to them, but after listening for several minutes it was apparent
that the boat was not coming toward them, but was crossing the lake,
probably diagonally, a half-mile or so away, heading, it seemed, for
the cypress shore. Once Pud thought he caught a momentary glimpse of
the boat in the gray void, but he could not be certain.

‘We’d better shout, I guess,’ he said, and did so. For a space there
was no response, although he shouted ‘Hallo!’ several times. Finally,
though, a hail came back to them.

‘What you want?’ called an impatient voice.

‘Help,’ replied Pud promptly. ‘Our engine’s broken down and we want to
get out of here!’

Another silence, as though the occupants of the boat were of two minds
as to rendering the requested assistance. Then at last the voice spoke
again, and the words sounded heavy with suspicion. ‘Who are you? What
you doin’ up here?’

‘We’re from Millville,’ answered Pud. ‘Three boys. We lost our way
this morning and got in here by mistake.’

‘Boys, eh?’ The voice was lower and had lost its quality of doubt. ‘All
right, we’re comin’. Keep a shoutin’ so’s we can locate you.’ The oars
sounded once more, growing louder, and, as Pud called at intervals, a
shadowy form emerged from the mist and took shape as it drew nearer,
resolving at last into a small skiff and two men, one at the oars and
the other huddled in the stern.

‘Motor-boat, hey?’ inquired the latter occupant. ‘Ain’t out of gas, are
you?’

‘No, we’ve got half a tankful. I don’t know what the trouble is. One
cylinder went back on us this morning and now she won’t start at all.’

As he spoke, Pud was reflecting that the two middle-aged men who were
slowly becoming recognizable as such were not at all the sort of
persons he would ordinarily ask assistance of. They were, he decided
uncomfortably, about as villainous-looking a pair as he had ever seen!
They were bearded and tanned and generally weathered as to face,
roughly clothed as to body, and entirely unprepossessing as to general
appearance. The man who rowed wore a dilapidated leather coat, from
which the water trickled as he moved his long arms back and forth, a
rusty felt hat and gray trousers that were rolled well above his bare
ankles to keep them from the water that swished about in the bottom
of the leaky boat. The man in the stern looked a degree more ragged,
his shoulders covered with an old fertilizer bag still eloquent of its
former use, and his cotton trousers stuffed into a pair of high-laced
boots much the worse for wear. A sodden straw hat dripped rain from its
down-pulled brim. The man in the stern was heavy-set, with a bulbous
nose and small twinkling eyes, and his name, as later developed, was
‘Cocker.’ His companion was taller, with broad shoulders and long
limbs. His nose was long and hooked and his staring eyes were crossed.
He answered to the name of ‘Lank.’

‘Well,’ said Cocker as the boat drew alongside the launch, ‘Lank here’s
the very feller you’re a-lookin’ for. He knows more about gasoline
engines and machinery――’

‘Shut your yap,’ said Lank savagely. Then, to Harmon, who was peering
interestedly over the side, ‘Here, take this painter, Nigger, and
make it fast. I’ll have a look at your engine, Mister. What make’s
it?’ He climbed aboard, followed by the man in the bow, and stretched
as he looked curiously about him. ‘Nice boat you’ve got,’ he said
approvingly. ‘Can she go?’

‘You mean fast?’ asked Pud. ‘No, not very.’

‘Six miles, I dare say.’

‘Nearer five,’ answered Pud. ‘She gets there, though――usually.’

‘Usually’s good,’ laughed the man grimly. ‘Well, let’s see what’s wrong
with the old wheezer.’ He set to work very knowingly, throwing the
fly-wheel over thrice experimentally, examining the carburetor, and
then unscrewing the plugs. Meanwhile the heavy-set Cocker roamed about,
his eyes studying everything most intently. Tim, watching, looked very
uneasy. He liked the appearance of the visitors as little as did Pud.

‘Got it,’ announced Lank presently. ‘Broken wire here. No spark, or not
much of a one.’ He drew forth a knife and made the repair deftly. ‘Got
some tape?’ he inquired. Pud furnished a roll, and a moment later Lank
directed: ‘All right, son. Try her now.’

Pud gave her a half-turn and she answered instantly. Lank laughed his
satisfaction. ‘Didn’t think to look at your wiring, I’ll bet,’ he said
derisively. ‘Well, maybe you wouldn’t have found the break if you had.
It _looked_ all right. Which way you boys travelin’?’

‘South,’ said Pud promptly. ‘Where do we get out of this lake?’

‘Well, there’s two ways,’ replied the tall stranger, seating himself.
‘There’s Flat Water Creek up at the north end that’ll take you to Fox
River. It’s about four miles to the river, I’d say. Then it’s about ten
miles down to The Flat.’

‘Gee,’ muttered Pud, ‘fourteen miles!’

‘Sure, but there’s a shorter way than that, son. Over yonder’s Cypress
Branch, and that’ll land you in Two-Mile Creek back of Swamp Hole. Only
thing is, you’d never find the branch, I reckon. Think they would,
Cockey?’

‘Not ’les’ we showed ’em. Not as dark as it is now, I’d say.’

‘No, you see it’s over there in them cypress, an’ if you don’t know
where to look for it you’d never find it, son. But we’re goin’ down the
branch and we’ll show you the way, if you ain’t objectin’ to comp’ny.’




                              CHAPTER XV

                              SET ADRIFT


‘No,’ said Pud, ‘we’d be glad to have you, of course.’

‘Spoke like a gentleman,’ approved Cocker. ‘Here, you Rastus, carry
this painter back and make it fast to the stern cleat.’

Harmon obeyed none too amiably and Pud and Tim lifted the anchor. A
hoarse laugh from Cocker called the boys’ attention to the fact that
he had pulled the flag-pole from the socket and was spreading the wet
folds of the flag for Lank’s benefit. ‘Well, sir, looky here! If it
ain’t the old Jolly Roger! Lank, this here’s a pirate craft we’re on!’

Lank only nodded, and beckoned to Pud. ‘All right, son,’ he said. ‘Head
her yonder till we pick up our landmark.’

Pud took the wheel and the launch set off into the mist, bearing
diagonally toward the cypress swamp. Lank stood at his back, whistling
a queer little tune through his teeth. Cocker, having tossed the flag
to the deck, lifted a fold of the tent and inspected it. Then he opened
a locker here and there and peered inside. Tim and Harmon watched him
disapprovingly.

‘Pretty well fixed for a cruise, ain’t you?’ he asked. ‘Tent an’
everything, eh? Plenty of victuals, too, likely. Well, well, solid
comfort I call it.’ He grinned leeringly. ‘Nice little boat you got,
fellers. Belong to you, does it?’

‘It belongs to his father.’ Tim indicated Pud, at the wheel.

‘That so? You come from Livermore?’

‘No, Millville, about thirty miles up-river.’

Pud heard this much, and then Lank was speaking. ‘There we are,’
said the latter. ‘See that cypress with the broken limb? Head up
about twenty feet beyond it and keep away from shore till you see the
opening.’ The dark wall of trees loomed closely through the twilight
now, the water showing far backward between the swollen trunks, black
and mysterious. On this side, the lake shallowed slowly to meet the
cypress swamp, and it was necessary to follow the shore well out from
the fringe of trees before turning toward the stream. At last Lank gave
the word and Pud doubtfully turned the boat’s nose shoreward. But a
moment later he saw that there was an opening between the cypress trees
about twelve feet wide, and into this the launch slowly chugged.

‘How much does she draw?’ asked Lank.

‘I don’t know exactly,’ replied Pud. ‘Not more than eighteen inches, I
guess.’

‘She’ll make it then. Better let me take her through this stretch.
There’s a lot of turns, and if you don’t know where they are you’re
likely to get snagged.’ Pud resigned the wheel and stood by, watching
curiously as the stranger steered the boat dexterously through the
narrow stream. The latter turned a dozen times before it emerged from
the gloom of the cypress woods, but fortunately none of the turns
were abrupt. It was a weird and desolate place, that swamp. Looking
upward, Pud could see dimly the feathery tops of the trees merging into
the gray mist. On every side the funereal trunks were crowded close
together and but little light filtered down to the black water about
them. Dead branches protruded in strange and uncanny shapes, and some
aquatic growth powdered the surface with infinitesimal green leaves. It
was a trifle lighter on the stream and its course lay like a lead-gray
ribbon ahead and behind. Save for an infrequent voice from the boat the
silence was absolute, oppressive. They were all glad when the launch
floated at last between banks of marsh grass and the gray twilight took
the place of the deeper gloom of the forest.

Lank yielded the wheel to Pud. ‘Straight sailin’ now,’ he said, ‘and
plenty of water under your keel.’

‘Is this Two-Pond Run?’ Pud inquired.

‘’Tain’t called that yet, but the Run’s only a mile or so ahead.’

‘Do you live around here?’

‘Well, no, not ’round here exactly. We’re sort of visitin’. Fishin’ a
bit, you know. Didn’t have any luck to-day, though.’

Pud started to say that he hadn’t noticed either lines or poles in
the skiff that was floating along behind, but thought better of it.
Instead, ‘I’ve heard the fish were pretty big in Cypress Lake,’ he
observed.

‘Big? Yes, they’re big, but they’re mighty shy. Swamp Pond’s more to my
taste, but that’s fished a lot. The Swampers keep that pretty clean.’

‘Which way is Swamp Hole from here?’ asked Pud.

Lank waved a big hand over the port bow. ‘Yonder,’ he answered, ‘about
two-three miles. If I was you I’d keep clear of it, son. Some of them
Swampers are kind o’ tough individuals.’

‘Well, if we go down Two-Pond Run do we keep away from the Hole?’

‘Pretty well. There’s a few cabins this side the Run, but I guess no
one won’t bother you if you just keep on rowin’.’

‘Rowing?’ echoed Pud.

‘I meant goin’. My mistake, son. Well, yonder’s where we leave you.
Just ease up against the bank to your left when we get to the branch.’
Not far ahead the stream forked, and Pud called to Tim to slow her down
and, finally, to stop. The launch nestled up against a bank and Cocker
led the skiff around to the side.

‘Well,’ he said, ‘the best of friends must part, as the old song has
it. We’re sorry to have you leave us, but I guess you’ll be wantin’
to get along toward home before it gets much darker. Come on, Mistah
Johnson, step aboard.’ He took Harmon by the shoulder and shoved him
ungently toward the skiff.

‘Take your han’s off me, Mister!’ protested the darky. ‘What you-all
aimin’ to do?’

‘Shut your black mouth and pile into that boat,’ said Lank grimly.
‘Come on, now, the rest o’ you!’

‘But we’re not going in that skiff!’ declared Pud stoutly. ‘We’re going
on down in this launch.’

‘No, you ain’t neither,’ answered Cocker. ‘We’ve swapped boats with
you. Mind you, we wasn’t keen for doin’ it, but you insisted, an’――’

‘Better give ’em a couple o’ dollars to boot,’ said Lank. ‘They might
claim we cheated ’em.’

‘That’s so!’ Cocker fished a bunch of dirty money from a pocket and
selected two bills. ‘Here you are, sonny. A fine rowboat and two
dollars for your launch. There’s some that wouldn’t trade so easy, but
me and Lank was always sort o’ soft-hearted.’

Pud pushed the greasy bills away, trying to smile, although his heart
was somewhere down in his shoes. ‘I guess you’ve made a mistake,’ he
said. ‘We haven’t traded the launch to you. We couldn’t, because it
isn’t ours to trade!’

‘Now don’t you try to go back on a bargain,’ remonstrated Cocker
reprovingly. ‘’Tain’t honorable, sonny.’ He laid a broad hand on Pud’s
arm and stuffed the money into a pocket. Then he propelled him to the
side. ‘Climb over now, ’cause we got to be shovin’ ahead. No nonsense,
neither, or’――he placed a huge fist an inch from Pud’s nose――‘you’ll
get this side o’ the jaw, see!’

‘Cut out that stuff,’ growled Lank. ‘The kid’s all right. Let him
alone.’

Pud turned hopefully to the speaker. ‘He’s fooling, isn’t he?’ he
gulped. ‘He can’t take this launch away from us! We’ve got all our
things here, and――’

‘You do like we’re tellin’ you,’ advised Lank coldly.

‘But――but you’ll give her back to me, won’t you?’

‘Oh, sure,’ agreed Cocker heartily. ‘We’re just borrowin’ it. Thought
you knew that.’

‘Well――when?’

‘Oh, most any day, I guess. Want we should send it parcel post or
express?’ Cocker laughed hoarsely at his humor and then broke off to
lift Harmon swiftly from his feet and drop him into the bottom of the
skiff. ‘Get in there!’ he ordered angrily. ‘Be quick about it or I’ll
throw you all in! Come on, snap into it!’

Pud looked miserably at Tim and found no encouragement to further
resistance. Tim was plainly frightened and was already climbing
onto the seat. Pud choked down a lump in his throat and spoke with
commendable calm. ‘All right,’ he said. ‘But you needn’t think you can
get away with this. You’re stealing my――’

‘Shut your face and get into that skiff,’ threatened Cocker savagely,
‘or I’ll kick you in!’

Pud followed Tim, and Lank tossed the painter down after him. ‘Sorry,
son,’ said the latter with gruff kindness, ‘but we have to do it. Keep
down that stream yonder and you’ll come out in The Flat. Good luck!
Clear out now, and――’

‘Mind this,’ growled Cocker, scowling down at them, ‘don’t you come
sneakin’ back, ’cause if you do we’ll put a bullet into you, and don’t
make no mistake!’

Tim had already found the oars and now he began to row hurriedly across
to the farther stream. Pud, tears of mortification in his eyes, watched
the launch fade away in the darkness a blurred white blotch until the
bank hid it from sight. Tim pulled hard at the oars and, although no
skillful waterman, soon had the skiff well on its way. No one spoke for
several minutes. Then, as it often happened, it was Harmon who broke
the silence.

‘Reckon ’em folkses knows a heap more about piratin’ ’an what we does,’
he said sorrowfully.

Neither Pud nor Tim seemed to be able to think of a suitable reply to
this statement and they went on until Tim, becoming exhausted, caught a
crab that almost landed him on his back.

‘Let me row,’ said Pud, and they changed places. Again silence fell
like a pall. The stream was wide and easy to follow even in the dusk
that was fast swallowing up the world. Small trees were interspersed
with bushes atop the low banks and these had already lost detail, were
black silhouettes against the grayer darkness of the sky. The rain had
stopped, but a foglike mist still hung over River Swamp. The boys were
damp and chill, hungry and discouraged. Finally Tim spoke from his
place in the stern.

‘Those men aren’t Swamp-Holers, Pud.’

‘I know,’ answered the other wearily. ‘He told me, the tall one.
They’re just visiting, he said.’

‘I think they’re town folks,’ Tim went on. ‘They didn’t talk like folks
around here, though sometimes it seemed as if they were trying to. And
one of them wore a leather coat, Pud. You wouldn’t see a leather coat
around the Swamp in a thousand years, I guess.’

‘No, I guess not,’ said Pud. His tone, though, suggested that he was
not greatly interested in his chum’s remarks. He rowed on, his strokes
growing weaker, and then suddenly he swung the skiff’s nose toward the
bank.

‘What you doing?’ asked Tim. ‘Look out, or――’

‘I’m going back,’ said Pud firmly. ‘I’m just not going to let them have
her, Tim!’ He backed water and headed the skiff upstream as he spoke.
‘No, sir, they can’t do that to me! I――I won’t let ’em!’

‘Well――well――’ sputtered Tim in alarm. ‘Well, what can you do, Pud? My
gracious goodness, we can’t go back there and have them shoot us like
they said they would, Pud! Why, my goodness――’

‘How you know they got a gun?’ asked Harmon from the bow. ‘I ain’ seen
no gun.’

‘They’ve got one, all right,’ insisted Tim. ‘And they wouldn’t hesitate
to use it, I guess!’

‘That’s all right,’ said Pud, rowing hard again. ‘I’m not asking you to
get shot, Tim. I don’t intend to let them see me, but I’m going to find
out where my boat is, and if they leave it alone a minute I bet I’ll
get it back!’

‘Yes, but――but now you look here, Pud Pringle! The best way to do is go
right on down to――to somewhere and tell the police about it! Gosh, I
guess it won’t take the police long to get your launch back!’

‘Maybe it won’t take me long, neither,’ answered Pud grimly. ‘All
I’m asking those fellows to do is just leave it alone for about two
minutes. That’s all I’m asking them!’

‘Well, yes, but――but how do you know where they’ve gone? My goodness,
Pud, we can’t row all over this old swamp looking for them! And suppose
they take it into Swamp Hole! I guess it wouldn’t be very healthy to
follow them in there!’

‘I’m going back where they put us out,’ said Pud resolutely, ‘and see
if it’s still there. If it isn’t I’m going to row until――’ But he
paused there. ‘Well, anyway, I’m going to find my boat,’ he concluded a
trifle lamely.

Tim was silent, torn between his loyalty to Pud and a strong and
growing disinclination to present himself as a target to the
blood-thirsty Cocker. Harmon said wistfully, more to himself than the
others: ‘Wish I had my good ol’ knife!’

Rowing against the current, sluggish though it was, soon began to tell
on Pud’s arms and shoulders. The skiff, awash with water in the bottom,
was old and decrepit, and the oars were mismated besides, one being
wider of blade than the other and at least two inches longer. But Pud
pulled on, breathing hard, feeling that a request for assistance would
go ill with the heroic rôle he had assumed. Finally the junction of
the Run with the second stream appeared in the darkness ahead and Tim
announced the fact to Pud in a voice that held no joy of discovery. Pud
stopped rowing and looked over his shoulder. Then he paddled silently
forward to where he could see the place where the launch had lain. It
was empty. He wasn’t greatly disappointed, though, for he had felt
pretty certain that the men had gone on in it down that side stream,
perhaps to some cabin near by, perhaps all the way to Swamp Hole. He
swung the boat around the point and let it drift against the bank there.

‘I guess you fellows had better get out here,’ he announced. ‘I’ll go
on a ways and see if I can’t find the launch. I guess you can find a
good dry place, and you can light a fire if you like. I’ll be back as
soon as I can, and if――’

‘I ain’ goin’ stay here,’ declared Harmon mutinously. ‘I goin’ with
you-all, Mister Pud, and find that there boat.’

‘So am I,’ said Tim, not quite so heartily. ‘Anyway, we can keep on
rowing until we see something like a house or a light or――or something.’

Harmon took one of the oars from the not unwilling Pud, and, with Tim
keeping an alert and anxious watch from the stern, they set forth
down the branch stream. The mist was thinning now, and already there
was a rift in the clouds from which a few white stars peeked down
upon the adventurers. Pud’s watch showed the time to be but a little
after eight. He had judged the hour far later. With the lifting of the
mist they were able to see for some distance, while the darker banks
outlined their course for them plainly. The stream twisted often, as
seemed the way of all streams in River Swamp, but no other waterways
entered or left it, to their knowledge. At every turn Tim whispered
hoarsely for caution, and when they were past his sigh of relief
sounded louder than his whisper. They had gone, to Pud’s thinking,
more than a mile when, over a hummock and between the bushes that clad
it, a faint twinkle of light caught Tim’s eyes. Obediently the rowers
stopped and let the slow current carry the skiff silently onward toward
a curve a few rods distant. Once around it Pud stealthily dug his blade
in the water and the skiff nosed silently into the bank. The stream ran
straight for a distance and, some three hundred feet away, the square
bulk of a cabin loomed against the night sky. A pale gleam of lamplight
fell through a window. Before the cabin, under the shadow of the bank,
lay a grayish blur. Straining his eyes, Pud made out the uncertain
shape of the launch.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                          NIGHT IN SWAMP HOLE


They listened intently. A faint breath of air was stirring and there
was a whispering and rustling from the bushes above them, and for a
space they heard nothing else. Then the sound of voices came, faintly,
from the cabin. Pud placed the handle of his oar in Harmon’s hand.

‘I’m going to get out here,’ he said. ‘You take the boat back around
the turn and keep hid. Stay there till I come. The launch will be
headed upstream, and if I can get her going I’ll slow down and get you
fellows aboard. Anyway, you stay here until I get back.’

‘Wha――what are you going to do?’ asked Tim nervously.

‘I’m going to swim down there and get aboard the launch. Then I’ll let
her float away farther downstream. When she’s out of sound of the house
I’ll get her going and come back up here for you.’

‘But you’ll have to pass the cabin,’ expostulated Tim, ‘and they’ll
hear you coming and shoot at you! Why don’t we let the skiff float on
past and wait for you below somewhere? Or why not wait till they’ve
gone to sleep?’

‘They might not go to sleep,’ replied Pud in whispers. ‘It might be all
right to go on past, but suppose some one came out and saw us? It would
be all up then. They’d know we were after the launch and they’d watch
it. Or they might get in and chase us and catch us.’

This last possibility silenced Tim effectually. He gave doubting
approval to Pud’s plan, and the latter, while Harmon worked the boat
slowly toward the turn, disrobed to his underclothes, an operation
extremely simple and brief. Finally, with a last whispered injunction
to wait right there, no matter what happened, Pud slipped soundlessly
into the water.

It was surprisingly chill for a moment, but he stifled a gasp and let
the current bear him away. Now and then he worked a foot or a hand, for
his progress seemed to him aggravatingly slow. The fact is that he was
just a little bit frightened, and when one is frightened the moments
have a way of lengthening dreadfully. The skiff disappeared from his
sight and the white shape of the launch drew closer. The cabin was
hidden from him by the bank, but, as he floated onward, the sound of
voices reached him now and then. He kept to the darker water near the
margin and, as a result, once became momentarily snarled in a submerged
branch. Then the bow of the launch appeared at arm’s length and he
let himself along the white side until he could reach up and grasp the
gunwale amidship. There he paused and listened, his heart beating hard.

The voices from the cabin came to him louder, but still as no more than
hoarse rumblings too faint to identify as those of Cocker and Lank.
Slowly and with difficulty, since he sought to make no noise, Pud drew
himself from the water and, with an anxious look at the cabin, some
fifteen paces distant, squirmed into the launch and dropped, wet and
panting, out of sight. Presently he wormed forward, past the bundle
of folded cots and tent that still lay against the engine casing, and
groped for the line that was holding the launch to a stake driven in
the top of the bank. He regretted then that he had not thought to
bring his knife. The stake was ten feet from where he lay stretched on
the bow planking, while to cast off at the launch meant losing a good
thirty feet of manila rope. He tried pulling the launch’s nose closer
to the stake, but he gained but a scant two feet before it grounded.
There was nothing for it but to pull the rope through the brass-rimmed
hole, work it loose at the cleat and go off without it. He raised his
head and looked toward the cabin as his hands fumbled with the line,
and as he looked a sudden glare of light shot toward him. The door had
opened, voices were plainly distinguishable and, against the yellow
light, framed in the doorway, were figures.

‘Well, I’ll get going,’ said a voice that Pud recognized as that of the
tall Lank. There was a yawn, interrupted by a second voice, one strange
to the listener.

‘You tella heem he not to go up da riv’,’ said the voice. ‘It is not
safe, you tella heem.’

‘Yeah, I’ll look after that,’ answered Lank. ‘He knows he’s got to work
down-river this time. Well――’

Pud, for the moment frozen with fright, now did the first thing that
entered his head. He squirmed down, lifted the canvas of the tent and,
the frame of a cot digging into his ribs, huddled closely, silently
beneath it. His heart was beating a dozen times to the second and he
thought regretfully of the safety of the dark water flowing alongside.
But it was too late now, for he could hear the steps of Lank close at
hand. Then the launch tipped and the man’s feet landed close to Pud’s
head. A faint light, probably, Pud thought, from his or Tim’s electric
torch, shone for an instant under the edge of the canvas. Then it
disappeared and, behind him, Pud heard the wheel turned. Suddenly the
engine started, shaking the boards against which the boy was lying,
and Lank’s feet brushed the canvas as he passed to the bow. There was
a whistled tune, broken by mutterings and the sound of feet scrambling
from shore to boat, and the flap of a dropped rope. Then Lank went back
to the engine and Pud felt the launch swinging as the current dragged
it away from the bank. The propeller revolved, stopped, started again,
the clutch grinding harshly in the silence. Then, the boat evidently
headed downstream, the voyage began.

Lank, it seemed, was steering from the seat beside the engine, working
the rudder with a hand on the wire rope where it passed him, a feat
that Pud had once attempted with almost disastrous results. After a
minute or two, though, he arose and came scuffling forward, and then it
was that Pud’s heart, which had already threatened to cease functioning
several times that evening, just plain stopped business! For the edge
of the canvas scarcely a foot from his frightened eyes was lifted!

He heard Lank grunt with the effort of bending, and he gave himself up
for lost. But in the next instant something heavy and bulky was forced
against his chest, prodded further with a kick of the man’s foot, the
canvas flap fell again and Pud’s heart, with a painful thump, decided
to beat again!

After a moment of revulsion that left him faint, Pud gathered
sufficient courage to ease his hands forward and feel inquiringly of
the object reposing under his chin. It was a bundle about a foot square
tied with stout twine. Pud’s curiosity ended, but not his concern.
Presently, perhaps, Lank would come after the bundle, and if he did
what was to prevent him from throwing back the canvas and exposing the
doubled-up form of one Pud Pringle? Or he might in fumbling around
in the darkness get hold of a bare foot; and Pud felt that in such
an event Lank would be sufficiently curious to see what was attached
to the foot! Pud stared venomously if unseeingly at the bundle. The
only thing that occurred to him was to thrust it farther away until a
portion of it showed beyond the canvas. So, perhaps, Lank would see it
and not go fumbling around too much. Pud was glad to get it away from
the immediate vicinity of his nose, for it had a strong and not too
pleasant odor, an odor that aroused in Pud dim memories connected with
unpleasant events. For want of a better occupation, and perhaps to keep
his thoughts from apprehensive speculation as to the outcome of this
adventure, Pud strove to connect that odor with the memories it evoked,
and while the launch chugged steadily on down the stream, and Lank
whistled plaintively and not unmelodiously from near by, he frowningly
bent his mind to its task. And suddenly――Eureka!――he had it!

Memory lifted a curtain and Pud saw himself, with Tim close by, in the
job-print room at the back of the _Courant_ office in Millville. It was
extremely hot and the sun made golden squares on the old green shades
that were pulled partly down at the open windows. Before him, and
before Tim, was a pile of printed circulars, and between them were long
white boxes into which they pushed envelopes containing the circulars
that, with the aid of wooden rulers, they had first thrice folded. This
was the price they had had to pay for the trip in the _Kismet_. The
circulars, recently from the press, still smudged if you touched the
print with your hand, and from them, nauseatingly strong in the hot
room, came the odor of printer’s ink! And it was printer’s ink that Pud
smelled now.

Again he felt of the package, lifted an end of it experimentally,
and decided that here, too, were circulars, and, so deciding, lost
further interest. Just so long as he didn’t have to fold the pesky
things and thrust them into obdurate envelopes they meant nothing in
his life. Nothing, at least, unless, searching for them, Lank found a
fifteen-year-old boy, clad only in a cotton union-suit, instead!

Perhaps ten minutes had passed, perhaps twenty, when Pud realized
that the launch was running more slowly. A light flickered past above
the bank and faint sounds reached him; a dog barked far off, another
answered from startlingly close; a rooster crowed in a tentative,
half-hearted way; a man’s voice shouted from nearby; the discordant
strains of a concertina grew louder. More lights peeked under the edge
of the canvas, the launch’s engine stopped abruptly, the sound of
laughter took its place amongst the medley of noise and there was a
slight bump and a rasping sound as the launch sidled up to a landing.
Pud’s heart began to do double-time again, he pushed the bundle farther
into the open and made himself smaller than ever.

Lank was stepping ashore with the bow line now, and now he jumped back
again, close to Pud’s place of concealment. Pud waited in an agony of
suspense. The man didn’t pass on, nor did he fumble along the edge of
the canvas. Finally, or so Pud’s straining ears told him, there was a
sound that might have been ‘Humph!’ and the feet moved on past Pud’s
head. Then the launch tilted a bit, steps sounded on a plank and Pud
knew that he was once more alone!

He lay still several long moments and then, pushing the bundle softly
out of his way, he slowly thrust his head forth and peered about
him. There was enough light from the stars and from the cabins that
clustered closely along both sides of the stream to show him that,
save for himself, the launch was empty. He scrambled out from under
the dusty folds of the tent and looked cautiously over the edge of the
boat. It was a strange scene that met his eyes.

The launch was fast to a small landing that jutted a few feet beyond
the bank. Straight back from it stood a building from whose wide-open
doorway streamed the yellow light of several lamps hanging from the
ceiling of the room into which Pud stared. The place was evidently both
a store and a residence, for through a second door the end of a bed was
visible, while along one side of the front room ran a counter at which
a half-dozen men were lounging. Behind it shelves held a small amount
of groceries: Pud could see the colored labels on cans and boxes. Much
loud talk and laughter came from the little store. It might be, Pud
reflected, that more things than groceries passed across that counter.
He thought he could distinguish the tall, broad-shouldered Lank among
the customers, but he was not certain.

Pud had no doubt about this place being Swamp Hole, and seen as he was
viewing it, with the board and slab cabins and little shanty-boats
dotting the banks of the creek, the light of candle or lamp falling
from doorway or window, with a tall and somber pine pointing up to the
starlit sky here and there like a black sentinel, it seemed indeed to
deserve its evil reputation. Farther down the stream a fire was burning
redly in front of a cabin and dark forms passed about it, throwing huge
and grotesque shadows athwart the glare. At short intervals along each
bank small wharves jutted over the black water and punts and skiffs
were numerous. Unseen to Pud, two men discussed the launch from the
black shadows of the farther bank.

‘’Tain’t nary boat I ever seen. Stranger in here, ’tis, Bud.’

‘Right nice-lookin’, too. Who you reckon run it in here? You see any
one get off’n it?’

The concertina began a new tune and a woman’s voice, shrill and
wailing, joined it. Some one in a near-by cabin beat protestingly on a
tin pan. A thin, bent-shouldered, bearded man came along the path that
followed the bank, paused a few yards distant to inspect the launch,
and then went on toward the store, straight along the lane of mellow
light that shone from doorway to wharf. ‘Where’d that there power-boat
come from?’ he drawled as he reached the threshold. ‘I seen a boat
mighty like that yesterday up on――’ The rest was lost to Pud.

The time for action had come. Already the stern of the launch was
turning slowly out into the stream. Pud clambered up and loosed the
line and scuttled back to the shadows of the boat. It seemed an age
before the current stirred the launch, but at last it began to slip
silently away from the tiny landing. Peering over the edge, Pud could
see the top of the bank move slowly past him. The launch was floating
almost broadside to the stream, but gradually it straightened out, its
bow pointing down the creek. Too late, Pud reflected that he might
almost as easily have taken to the water again and pushed the launch
upstream until out of sight and then started the engine, in which case
he would have got back to Tim and Harmon quickly enough. Now he would
have to keep on down the creek, trusting to luck to find his way into
Two-Pond Run.

But all that was for the future. Just now, crouching at the bow,
listening with loudly beating heart for sounds that would announce that
Lank had discovered his loss, Pud was concerned only with the present.
Already the sluggish current had borne him a good fifty yards and the
sounds from the store came to him subdued by distance. Other sounds
took their place; low voices from doorsills, snatches of wavering song,
a man’s voice raised in maudlin anger, the querulous wailing of a baby.
He was nearing the outdoor fire now and the ruddy light was blotching
the still water ahead. That the launch would pass unseen was too much
to hope for, and he debated whether to remain concealed or to show
himself at the bow. The question was settled for him.

‘Hey, Pap, look yander! A big boat!’ It was the shrill voice of a small
boy.

‘Power-boat, ’tis,’ grunted the father. ‘Where’d it come from, you
reckon, Cal?’

‘I d’know, Pap. Ain’t ary soul in it, be there?’

‘Don’t look like. Must have slipped its line, eh?’

‘Want I should fetch it?’

‘Naw, what for? Let them as owns it come arter it.’ The speaker
chuckled maliciously. ‘They’ll be along soon enough, I reckon.’

The launch floated silently by and into the welcome darkness beyond the
fire’s radiance. The sound of oars ahead brought Pud’s eyes above the
bow. A small punt was creeping upstream, the man who was rowing unaware
of the other craft. Pud turned the wheel quickly to avoid a collision,
and the faint squeak of the ropes brought the rower’s head around
sharply. A volley of oaths broke the silence as the two boats scraped
past. Then from back up the creek came a loud shout.

‘Hey! Some one grab that launch! Launch adrift down-creek!’

‘Here she be! I’ll fetch her!’ The man in the punt, already a length
astern, spun his small craft about and dug his oars. Pud stood up
desperately.

‘You keep away!’ he called threateningly. ‘This is my boat!’

‘Hallo!’ The man in the punt evinced surprise and for a moment stopped
rowing. Then, ‘Reckon you’re stealin’ her,’ he grunted. ‘Better come
along back with her.’ The punt bumped into the stern of the launch and,
armed with an oar, the occupant began to scramble aboard.

‘I’m not stealing her!’ protested Pud. ‘You keep off!’

He started back toward the stern. His foot found something that turned
beneath it, almost upsetting him. Stooping, his hand closed on the
boat-hook, no longer trailing astern but back in its former rôle of
general nuisance. But it was no nuisance just now, for, holding it
before him, Pud charged toward the enemy. The man, a squat form in
the darkness, was steadying himself preparatory to jumping down from
the stern planking. Perhaps if he had not been burdened with the oar
he might have recovered his balance sooner, but as it was he was in
no position to stand the thrust of Pud’s weapon. There was a grunt, a
loud splash, the rattle of the falling oar against the punt and, for
an instant, silence. Then the man’s head came up and, between puffings
and gurgles, he pursued the vanishing launch with venomous oaths. A
minute later Pud heard him scrambling over the side of the punt. A
final raking fire of profanity followed, and then oars creaked against
thole-pins again, the creaking diminishing momentarily, and Pud knew
that he had won the action. Breathing hard, but exultant, he dropped
the boat-hook and sprang to the engine. Up the stream the shouting
continued, drawing nearer each second.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                               MAROONED!


Tim and Harmon watched Pud until the bend of the stream intervened and
then, somewhat dejectedly, nosed the skiff to the bank and sat there
in silence for a while. As usual, mosquitoes and gnats were numerous
and bloodthirsty, but the boys had to an extent become inured to them
and only when the pests invited slaughter by attacking their faces did
they trouble to combat them. They sat sidewise, their feet on the seats
they occupied to keep them out of the inch or two of water that covered
the floor of the punt. The position was not extremely comfortable,
and after a while Tim announced that he was going to get out onto
the bank. Harmon followed, with Pud’s clothing, and tied the painter
to a bush. There was a small space bare of shrubbery from which, by
leaning forward, they could see the light in the cabin. Tim had just
drawn attention to this fact when they heard the sound of the launch’s
engine. They became tense as they listened. It stopped, began again.
Then it became steady and its sound dwindled.

‘He’s got it,’ exclaimed Tim, ‘but he’s going downstream!’

‘How-come he do that?’ inquired Harmon.

‘Maybe she was headed down and he couldn’t turn her. How’s he going to
get back here?’

‘Reckon he goin’ find him a wide place an’ turn her roun’ and shoot
back quick!’

‘Yes, and they’ll shoot quick, too!’ said Tim anxiously. ‘Can you hear
her now, Harmon?’

‘Yes, she still a-hummin’, but she long ways off.’

They waited. A half-hour passed, an hour. Then they forgot to keep
track of time. The sky cleared magically and a million glittering white
stars looked down on them. Tim gave up hope at last. ‘They got _him_,’
he concluded sadly. ‘That’s what happened. Maybe they killed him,
Harmon!’

‘They mighty mean-lookin’ pair,’ agreed the darky amiably.

‘Well, my gracious goodness!’ exclaimed Tim, outraged. ‘You don’t sound
like you cared if they had!’

‘Who ain’ carin’? ’Course I is! Mister Pud’s mighty fine boy. But,
shucks, I don’ reckon they really _kill_ him. Maybe they pirate him.’

‘Well, I’d like to know what we’re going to do,’ said Tim despondently.
‘I’m hungry, and it’s getting cold, and my feet are wet――’

‘How-come we don’ build us a fire?’

‘Because they’d see us and come after us.’

‘They ain’ no light there now. I reckon they done gone to bed, Mister
Tim. ’Sides, how they goin’ get us? They’s on ’at side of the creek and
we’s on this side, an’ they ain’ got no boat, is they?’

‘N-no, maybe not, but they could swim across, couldn’t they? Or they
could shoot us!’

But after another ten minutes of shivering discomfort the fact that the
cabin no longer showed a light convinced even the cautious Tim that a
fire would be permissible.

‘I goin’ build it down in ’at there hollow yonder,’ said Harmon, ‘and
no one ain’ goin’ see it nohow.’

Fuel was not easily come by, but after some search Harmon gathered
enough to start with. Fortunately, in his position of cook he carried
a box of matches in the pocket not sacred to his mouth-organ, and
presently from the hollow between two hummocks, a not overly dry place,
a cheerful ruddy light sprang. Tim approached it warily, mindful of
snakes, of which they had seen many during the last two days. Harmon
continued his quest for dry branches while Tim huddled close to the
fire and, in its warmth, began to see life less darkly. Harmon joined
him finally and they talked of food. Harmon craved a couple of fat pork
chops and lots of gravy. Tim’s thoughts dwelt fondly on roast lamb
and potatoes roasted whole with the meat. He became almost lyrical in
his description of the golden-brown surfaces of those potatoes, and
Harmon’s eyes grew large and round as Tim pictured the juice trickling
from under the carving knife as it sliced into the lamb!

But there wasn’t much lasting pleasure to be derived from such vain
imaginings and presently the conversation swung back to Pud and once
more they exchanged theories. It might be, they agreed, that he had
captured the boat and was going down until he could get back into
Two-Pond Run and ascend that stream to where they were waiting. But Tim
feared that such a journey would take Pud to Swamp Hole, and he had
little faith in his chum being able to escape from that dread spot with
his life――to say nothing of the launch!

‘How-come they so bad in ’at there Swump Hole?’ asked Harmon.

‘I guess they’ve always been that way,’ said Tim. ‘The way I heard it,
Harmon, is like this. When they were fighting the Civil War, a long
time ago, there were some men around here who didn’t want to fight. So
they packed up and went back in River Swamp and hid out there where
no one could find them. When folks went after them, they’d hide in
the bushes and shoot at ’em, or maybe they’d just get in their boats
and sneak around these creeks until the folks that were hunting them
got tired and went away again. Well, after a while the war got over
and those men just settled down in Swamp Hole and had families and
everything, and then, I guess, other folks heard about it and came,
too. Anyway, my father says there’s more than fifty families in Swamp
Hole, and they don’t send their kids to school or pay taxes or anything
like that.’

‘Huh,’ said Harmon, ‘mus’ be mighty ign’nt folkses!’

‘’Course they are. Guess that’s one reason they’re so bad. They’re
poor, too, and maybe that’s another reason.’

‘Poor folkses ain’ bad,’ objected Harmon.

‘N-no, but folks that are awfully poor and ignorant, _too_, sometimes
are.’

Harmon didn’t challenge that. Instead, he asked: ‘How they live, Mister
Tim?’

‘I don’t know. Some of them raise a few things; tobacco, for instance.
And they do a lot of fishing.’

Conversation died for a space. Then Harmon asked, ‘When you reckons we
goin’ get home again, Mister Tim?’

‘Home!’ said Tim bitterly. ‘Gosh, it doesn’t look as if we’d _ever_ get
home!’

‘I’s jus’ ’bliged to be there Monday mornin’, please, sir,’ persisted
Harmon anxiously. ‘I’s got me a ’gagement with Mister Tom Pawling to
cut his lawn, and Mister Tom’s pow’rful uppity if’n I ain’ keep my
’gagements!’

‘I wish I was at home right now,’ said Tim longingly. ‘My goodness
gracious, there isn’t any _sense_ in this! Sitting out here in an old
swamp without any supper or any bed! Gosh, I wish I was in my own bed
this minute.’

‘Ain’ ’at the truth?’ agreed the other sympathetically. ‘Folkses is
always wantin’ be where they ain’. Some time when I’s lyin’ all wrop up
warm in my own bed I’s goin’ say to myself, “Lawsey, ’at certainly was
one fine ol’ time me an’ Mister Tim have ’at night we was in the swump
sittin’ roun’ li’l’ ol’ fire an’ talkin’!” Yes, sir, I’s certainly
goin’ say ’at very thing!’

‘Humph,’ grunted Tim with a perceptible lack of enthusiasm. ‘It won’t
ever bother me any to be wrapped up warm in my own bed!’ He shivered.
‘And if I ever do get home again,’ he added emphatically, ‘I’ll be
satisfied to stay there! Next time Pud Pringle gets me to go on any old
cruise with him――_What’s that?_’

Tim broke off to start nervously at the sound of a soft rustling in
the bushes behind him. ‘Didn’t you hear it?’ he demanded, looking
around apprehensively. ‘Suppose it was a snake?’

‘No, sir, ain’ no snakes traipsin’ roun’ this time o’ night, Mister
Tim. They all in bed an’ asleep. Reckon it was a turkle. Lots of
turkles in this ol’ swump.’

‘You mean turtles. Anyway, I guess snakes do crawl around at night,
because I’ve heard them.’

‘You is?’ Harmon’s tone held doubt. Then: ‘Mister Tim, was I ever
tellin’ you ’bout Sawyer Beeson an’ the rattlesnake?’

‘No. Who’s Sawyer Beeson?’

‘He’s a colored man what use’ to work with my pa in the chair fac’ry.
He ain’ livin’ roun’ here no more. Please, sir, let me tell you ’bout
him an ’at rattlesnake.’

‘Go ahead,’ said Tim, yawning.

Harmon laid a couple of branches on the small fire and hunched himself
forward, hugging his bare black knees. ‘This here Sawyer Beeson was a
mighty lazy, no-coun’ nigger, Mister Tim. Times he’d work a li’l’ in
the fac’ry an’ times he wouldn’ do no work at all. You knows Mister Sam
Glendon ’at lives up at the Park? Well, one time this Sawyer Beeson
was doin’ some sort o’ work for Mister Glendon up at his house and
Mister Glendon he say to Sawyer, “Sawyer, you fotch me a rattlesnake,
an’ I pays you five dollars.” “My goodness, Mister Glendon,” Sawyer
say, “what you-all wantin’ with a rattlesnake?” “I wants him for a
specimens,” Mister Glendon tell him. “You go catch one an’ brung him to
me ’live an’ I hands you five dollars.”

‘Well, sir, Sawyer was needin’ five dollars ’bout ’at time an’ so he
ponders awhile. And then he goes an’ gets him a gunny sack and cuts him
a forked stick and goes lookin’ for Mister Rattlesnake. He clumb up on
Coop’s Hill where the water-tower’s at, but he ain’ fin’ no snakes at
all. Then he goes on back a piece over roun’ ’at place where the ol’
quarry used to be, an’ after a while he sees him a rattlesnake. Mr.
Rattlesnake ain’ doin’ nothin’ at all but ’joyin’ the weather outside
his home, an’ he kin’ o’ sleepy, maybe. So Sawyer Beeson he done crup
up on ol’ snake an’――bam!――he put ’at forked stick down over his neck!
Mister Rattlesnake he twis’ an’ he turn an’ he flip an’ he flop, but
’twan’t no use at all. Then Sawyer he spread out ’at there gunny-sack
an’ he say to Mister Rattlesnake, ‘You go on in there ’fore I busts
you’ head for you!’ Then he sort o’ eases up on ’at forked stick an’
Mister Rattlesnake he crawls right at ’at gunny-sack! First his head
goes an’ then his middle an’ then his tail an’ then his rattles, an’
when his button’s done out o’ sight Sawyer he grabs up the gunny-sack
quick by a string what he’s got aroun’ the top of it and he pulls it
shut mighty sudden!

‘’Twas a long ways back to town an’ Sawyer he was mighty nigh dead by
the time he gets to Mister Sam Glendon’s. ’Cause, you see, Mister Tim,
he has to hold ’at there gunny-sack clear away from him, like this,
an’ his arms gits powerful tired. He ain’ wantin’ ’at snake to bite
him through the sides of ’at bag. No, sir! Lots o’ times he wants to
lay ol’ gunny-sack down, but he’s afraid he ain’t got it tied right
tight an’ he’s scared to do it. So he keep on a-walkin’, changin’ arms
mighty frequent, an’ after a while he ’rives at Mister Glendon’s. “I
done fotch ’at snake you asks me for,” he say. “Does I get me ’at five
dollars?” “You certainly does,” Mister Glendon say. “Is he a big snake,
Sawyer?” “Well, to tell the truth, Mister Sam,” Sawyer tell him, “he
ain’ so powerful prodigious, sir, but he’s the weightenes’ snake I
ever carries, sir!” So Mister Glendon he gets him a cage and opens it
and Sawyer he cuts the string of ’at there gunny-sack an’ he drops it
in the cage an’ they waits for Mister Rattlesnake to come out an’ say
“Howdy.” But he ain’ show hisself, an’ after a-while Mister Glendon
get him a stick an’ poke ol’ bag around. But still Mister Rattlesnake
ain’ come out. So Mister Glendon he lifts ’at bag up and shakes it an’
there ain’ no snake there at all! No, sir, ’at ol’ Mister Rattlesnake
he jus’ crawl _under_ ’at gunny-sack ’stead of _into_ it, an’ all time
Sawyer was pullin’ it tight Mister Rattlesnake was a-lyin’ right there
laughin’ at him! Yes, sir, jus’ a-bustin’ his sides, I reckon! Mister
Glendon he done give Sawyer two-bits ’stead o’ five dollars, ’cause, he
say, the way Sawyer look when he see they ain’ no rattlesnake, an’ he
’members how he nigh wore hisself out carryin’ ’at gunny-sack home, was
wuth it!’

Tim, whose eyes had closed more than once during the leisurely
narrative, chuckled sleepily. ‘It’s a good story, Harmon,’ he murmured.
‘Guess I’ll just lie down awhile and――’

He didn’t finish the remark. He didn’t need to. He was already asleep.
Harmon placed another branch on the flames, looked appraisingly at the
slender stock of fuel remaining and shook his head. After a moment his
hand stole into his pocket and emerged with his mouth-organ. He viewed
it longingly and then glanced at the slumbering Tim. After a period of
hesitation he shook his head again, replaced the faithful instrument in
his pocket and curled himself up by the fire.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                           COUNTERFEIT MONEY


Pud searched hurriedly, frantically in the gloom for the handle that
fitted into the fly-wheel while the sounds of pursuit grew louder and
nearer. He found it at last, slipped it in place, and heaved mightily.
There was no response from the engine. Then he remembered that he had
not switched the spark on. The omission remedied, he turned the wheel
again, and this time the response was instantaneous. The engine raced
loudly. He peered forward, saw that the launch’s head still pointed
into the stream and pulled the clutch lever back. Then he hurried again
to the bow and seized the wheel.

Now he dared an anxious look to the rear. Lights moved along the bank
and there was a confusion of hails and shouts, but for the moment he
was not threatened with capture. With the throttle wide open and the
current aiding, the launch slipped down the winding stream at a good
five miles an hour. Pud believed that there were motor-boats of a sort
back there, but he doubted that any of them could show much speed.
Besides, it would take minutes to get one started, and already he had
a fair lead. Cabins still showed their lights along the way, but they
stood farther apart now. A smaller stream led off to the left, but Pud
paid it no heed. Then came a longish turn in the creek, and presently,
looking back, but one solitary light met his view. Perhaps the sounds
of pursuit still kept up, but the engine was chugging loudly and he
could no longer hear them. He heaved a deep sigh and sank onto the seat
beside the wheel.

It was not difficult to follow the creek, for, once away from the
lights of Swamp Hole, it lay before him quite plainly in the starlight,
a broadening path bordered by the black gloom of its banks. The stars
were reflected brightly in its still depths as it led him on and away
from the Hole. As the minutes passed and no sign of pursuit showed,
his courage grew. Sitting there in the bow he began to talk to himself
aloud.

‘I told them they couldn’t get away with it,’ he muttered. ‘I guess
they know it now! No one can steal my good old boat, I guess; not to
keep it! No, sir, not for very long they can’t! I guess Lank’s pretty
mad about now. I guess he’s wondering what happened.’ Pud chuckled.
‘I’d just like to know what he _does_ think! Bet you he never will
suspect I did it!’

He sort of wished he might somehow have revealed himself to Lank before
he got free. It would have been decidedly satisfying to have called
back a defiance. Pud pictured himself standing in the stern, shaking
his fist at the amazed Lank and shouting, ‘Ha, villain, what think
you now? Pud Pringle has come into his own once more!’ Well, anyway,
something like that.

Pud couldn’t see just how he could have done that, though. He guessed
it was better to get the boat back than to have risked failure seeking
credit for the exploit. Besides, maybe Lank and Cocker――and the other
man who had talked so funny――would feel more worried and humiliated if
they weren’t able to account for the boat’s disappearance. Maybe they’d
think it was spooks! On the whole, Pud was pretty well satisfied. He
did wish, though, that he knew whether the men had stolen the contents
of the lockers. There was no time to satisfy himself on that point
now, but, since they had not taken the tent and the beds and the
cooking-kit, he didn’t think it likely they had disturbed the things
that were out of sight.

The launch did what Pud believed to be a mile without misadventure. She
did strike a snag once, but she broke through it without damage to the
propeller. Where the creek was leading him he didn’t know, save that
it must eventually bring him either into Two-Pond Run or Turtle Creek.
Since leaving the Hole he had, he reckoned, been going in a generally
southwesterly direction, and it seemed that Two-Pond Creek must be
somewhere ahead. Once on that stream, he meant to double back and
rescue Tim and Harmon. He recalled their plight with mingled sympathy
and amusement. Tim, he decided, would be complaining like anything
about now!

More than once he caught sight of small streams leading away from the
one he traversed, but he had no use for them, and it was not until
what seemed another mile had been left behind that he was called on
to choose between divergent courses. Turning somewhat abruptly to the
left, he saw, as the boat swung, a sizable stream leading away to the
right. He stumbled back and threw out the clutch, but by the time the
launch had slowed down the other opening was far back. Perhaps it would
lead to Two-Pond Run, he reflected, but it looked in the darkness
rather as if it went back toward Swamp Hole. Besides, it was much
narrower than the stream he was on, and it might peter out and lead
him nowhere. Half an hour later he was glad he had not taken it, for
then he came to a creek fully as large as the one it entered, one that
started off in just the right direction. It wasn’t until he had gone
some distance along it that he discovered that the current was flowing
against him!

Dismay vanished, though, when he recalled the erratic behavior of River
Swamp waterways. Even if he was going upstream he might reach Two-Pond
Run. Anyway, he would keep on. He was tired now, and pretty sleepy,
too, and the rescue of his marooned companions seemed far less urgent
than it had earlier. Nothing could happen to them, anyhow. Of course
they wouldn’t find it very pleasant, spending the night up there in the
hummocks, and they’d be kind of hungry――Pud paused. Gee, he was hungry
himself, now that he came to think of it! Still, he wasn’t nearly so
hungry as he was sleepy. He yawned widely.

The dark water, star-sprinkled, continued interminably between its
banks, the latter now patched with groups of trees that threw pockets
of blackness over the stream. Pud’s eyes closed for moments at a time,
but always he managed to force them open in time to avoid running
aground. He blinked longingly at the pile of canvas behind him. If he
could only snuggle up under there in warmth and darkness and go to
sleep! Warmth was becoming almost as desirable as slumber, for, while
his wet underclothes had long since dried, the night was growing chill
with the damp coolness of the swamp and he was beginning to shiver.
There were things he might put on, but he would have to stop the boat
to search for them in the lockers, and rather than pause he huddled
lower under the gunwale and stared painfully ahead in the hope of
seeing Two-Pond Run appear.

Presently he sighed with relief, for the stream widened suddenly and
then was lost in a larger body of water. But his succeeding sigh was
one of disappointment. It was not the Run he had found, but a pond
somewhat larger than Turtle Pond. He must have spent a quarter of an
hour chugging about it and straining weary eyes along the shadowed
margin for sign of a way out. Twice he poked the launch’s nose into
the mud when what had looked like the mouth of a stream proved only a
shallow. But finally perseverance won and he was going on once more
along a black, tree-bordered creek that seemed to run almost at right
angles to the one he had left. More time passed. His head nodded
frequently, but it wasn’t safe to close his eyes now even for an
instant, for this stream was far darker and turned continually to right
and left.

Then he found himself in another pond, a pond that was twice as large
as the one he had recently found his way out of, and he threw out the
clutch and stared discouragedly about him. This settled it, he told
himself. Had he reached the Run, he would have somehow pegged on, but
to spend another age nosing around the sides of a pond was beyond him.
He was sorry for Tim and Harmon, but they’d just have to make out as
best they could. As for him, he was going to sleep!

He dragged the anchor from the bow locker and dropped it over,
shortened the line and made it fast, his hands all thumbs, and then
made his bed. The boat-hook, rescued by Lank or Cocker from the water,
again served him well. He rested an end on each gunwale, draped the
folds of the canvas over it in the shape of a tent and crawled beneath.
But the canvas was unsympathetic against his chilled body and he
stumbled out and searched the nearer lockers. Luck was with him, for
he found Tim’s gray flannel shirt and a pair of trousers; whose, Pud
neither knew nor cared. Clothed in these garments, he again sought the
seclusion of his improvised tent. This time, in lowering himself to the
floor, he came in contact with an uncomfortable object that proved to
be Lank’s package. He thrust it out of the way, gathered the folds of
the canvas under his head as a pillow and, with a long and delicious
sigh, gave himself to slumber. He was just floating blissfully off
when a disturbing thought came to him. He hadn’t written to his folks
that day! Worse, the letter he had written yesterday still lay in his
jacket pocket, unposted! These reflections, though, couldn’t keep him
awake long, and soon he was fast asleep.

Had he known that the one letter posted by him had, by one of those
mistakes such as even an efficient Post-Office Department sometimes
makes, been dispatched to Millersville instead of Millville, and that
it was not to arrive at the little house on Arundel Street until the
next morning, he might have been kept awake two minutes longer, but
certainly no more than that!

He awoke to an amber glow that offended his eyes. For a moment he
wondered dazedly where he was. Then he turned his head and snuggled
back, his whereabouts a matter of no interest. But it was more than the
sunlight striking through the faded brown canvas that had disturbed
him, and he was destined to sleep no longer. There were sounds about
him, and then his tent was invaded and a lean countenance with a
grizzled mustache and two keen brown eyes was bending over him. About
the same instant the boat-hook fell on one of Pud’s ankles and he
became very wide awake, though sorely puzzled.

‘Hello!’ said the lips under the grizzled mustache.

‘Hello,’ replied Pud vaguely. ‘What time――’ But that inquiry didn’t
seem just the right one, and he changed it to: ‘What do you want?’

‘Well, we might be wanting you,’ answered the man. Two other faces
appeared, a long, tanned face, clean-shaven, and a somewhat round face
that held a wide smile. Pud thought that they must find it rather
uncomfortable to be standing in the water like that, but when he had
attained a sitting position he found that they were leaning over the
side of a trim launch lying alongside. That was both surprising and
interesting, and Pud climbed to his feet to have a better look.

‘What’s your name, youngster?’ pursued the man who had spoken before.

Resentful of the term ‘youngster,’ Pud was taking his own time about
replying when he discovered two things almost simultaneously, to wit;
that the round-faced man wore the uniform of the police, and that,
as the speaker leaned forward, a nickel badge, pinned close to the
arm-hole of his vest, was exposed to view. Pud decided to forgive the
term.

‘Anson Pringle,’ he replied respectfully.

‘What!’ The man leaned back and cast a glance toward the bow of Pud’s
launch. ‘What are you doing in this boat, then? Where’s the one you
started out in? And what have you done with the other boys?’

‘I changed the name,’ explained Pud. ‘They――they’re up there a ways.’

‘No wonder we couldn’t get trace of the _Kismet_,’ chuckled the
policeman. ‘Say, kid, why didn’t you write to your folks like they told
you to? Didn’t you know they’d be anxious?’

‘I did write once,’ answered Pud. ‘Tuesday.’

‘Well, they never got it,’ said the first man, who it later appeared,
was a sheriff. ‘They’re pretty worried about you, Anson. So are the
other boys’ folks. Your father telephoned to me last night about ten
o’clock and we started out early this morning to look for you. No one
had seen a launch called _Kismet_, but we found an old chap at Corbin
who remembered a boat with two white boys and a negro in it. He had the
name wrong, though. What did he say it was called, Tom?’

‘_Vengeance_, I think.’

‘This is it,’ said Pud. ‘It’s the _Vengance_ on one side and the _Jolly
Rodger_ on the other.’

‘For the love of Mike! What’s the idea?’

‘I couldn’t just decide which I liked best,’ said Pud.

There was a chuckle from the third occupant of the police launch.
He was looking to where the skull-and-cross-bones flag, dropped by
Cocker, lay outspread near the stern. ‘Playing pirate, I guess, eh?’ he
inquired.

‘Sort of,’ muttered Pud.

‘Playing the dickens, you mean,’ observed the policeman severely.
‘Worrying your folks ’most to death!’

‘But I did write, I tell you! I wrote twice, only the last letter
didn’t get posted because we lost our way and got up into Cypress
Lake――’

‘You did! Well, I’ll be switched!’ The sheriff shook his head amazedly.
‘And found your way out again, eh?’

‘Well, two men came along and showed us the way, and then they stole
the launch and I went and got it back and I was trying to find Tim and
Harmon, but I got so sleepy I couldn’t go on, and so I stayed here,
and――’

‘Stole your launch, did they? Who were they? How’d you get it back?’

‘Hold on,’ said the policeman. ‘We’d better take him in with us and go
fetch those other kids. He can tell us about that on the way. Where’d
you say you left them?’

‘About a couple of miles this side of the lake; where you turn off the
Run to go into Swamp Hole. You see, Lank and Cocker live along that
stream a ways, and――’

‘Those the men who stole your boat?’

‘Yes, sir.’

The policeman eyed the sheriff. ‘Who might they be, Henry?’

‘Don’t know. Sure the name wasn’t Hank? There’s three-four Hanks up
there.’

‘No, sir, it was Lank. I don’t believe they belong in the Swamp
regular. Lank said they were just visiting. He said they’d been fishing
when we met them, but they didn’t have any lines or poles in the skiff.’

‘What sort of looking men were they?’ asked the third occupant of the
police launch. He appeared to take interest in the conversation for the
first time. Pud described Lank and Cocker as well as he could.

‘Cross-eyes, you say? And a long, crooked nose? And might be all of six
feet tall?’

‘Yes, sir, I think so.’

‘Know him, Kinsey?’ asked the sheriff.

‘I wouldn’t be surprised. Sounds a lot like Jim Thorbourn. Thorbourn
served a term at Joliet about four years back. Hasn’t been heard of
since that I know of.’

‘Counterfeiting?’ inquired the policeman.

‘Passing.’

‘Well, he doesn’t answer the description of any of the lot we’ve heard
of,’ said the policeman.

‘He might have passed the stuff out to them. Son, did you see the place
they live in?’

‘Not very well. It was sort of dark then. It was just a board cabin.’
Pud was trying to piece things together in his mind. The word
‘counterfeiting’ seemed to suggest something to him, but he couldn’t
think what!

‘Can you take us to it?’ asked Mr. Kinsey.

‘I’m not sure,’ said Pud. ‘If I could find Tim and――’ He stopped
suddenly, staring wide-eyed at the other.

‘What’s wrong?’ demanded the man.

Pud found his tongue. ‘Lank took a package with him,’ he said slowly.
‘It――’

‘What sort of a package?’ Mr. Kinsey asked eagerly.

‘Square. It smelled of ink. I thought it was circulars.’

‘Where’d he take it?’

‘To Swamp Hole.’

‘You been in there, too!’ cried the sheriff.

‘Well, well, what did he do with it?’ pursued Mr. Kinsey impatiently.

‘Nothing,’ said Pud. ‘He left it. It’s here.’

‘Here! Where? Find it, you young idiot!’

At another time Pud might have resented the title, but now he didn’t
notice it. He was searching hurriedly under the confusion of his
wrecked tent. Then he found the package, and Mr. Kinsey, who had
jumped down beside him, snatched it out of his hands. He didn’t hurry
to open it, though. Instead, he turned it over and over and studied
it thoroughly. To Pud, wildly impatient, he seemed to be the slowest
person he had ever met! Finally, though, Mr. Kinsey took a penknife
from a pocket and severed the stout cord. The sheriff and the policeman
leaned curiously forward as the coarse brown paper was removed. Then,
as the contents were exposed, the sheriff whistled softly, eloquently.
Pud’s eyes grew bigger and bigger.

There, in two neatly stacked piles, was more money than he had ever
dreamed of!




                              CHAPTER XIX

                          THE DESERTED CABIN


‘Phoney?’ asked the sheriff.

Mr. Kinsey lifted some of the bills from one of the two stacks and
riffled the edges with a square thumb, nodding. These were tens; the
other pile held twenties. He passed one of the oblong slips of crisp
paper to the sheriff. ‘Rotten job,’ he said contemptuously. ‘Wouldn’t
fool a child. Look at the lathe work! And the threads, done with a fine
pen; no silk there. These are some of the same lot, Sheriff, as the
ones the banks picked up. I’d like mighty well to know who made the
plates. He must be a fool to think he could get away with anything as
crude as that!’

‘Well, now, I don’t know,’ said the sheriff slowly. ‘I reckon if some
one was to hand me one of those I wouldn’t suspect anything wrong with
it. ’Course, if I was on the lookout for queer money I might be leery.’
He handed the bill to the policeman.

‘I’d take it in a minute,’ said the latter, ‘if I didn’t know there was
bad ones around.’

Mr. Kinsey smiled and shook his head. ‘It will pay you to get a
genuine bill and study it,’ he said. ‘It’s a good thing to know what a
real ten-dollar bank-note looks like, Casey. Then maybe you won’t ever
get stung.’ He placed the bill back and retied the package. ‘Want to
run up there, Sheriff, and look things over?’ he asked as he climbed
back into the other boat.

‘Well, I dunno,’ was the reply. ‘Think there’s enough of us?’

‘Oh, there won’t be any trouble,’ answered Mr. Kinsey. ‘They’ve
skipped by this time. I’d just like to look the place over. Might find
something that would help me a bit.’

‘Well, if they’ve gone,’ objected the sheriff, ‘we’d better go back to
town, maybe, and work the ’phone.’

‘No hurry. I’d rather find out who they are first. I’m pretty sure
about Thorbourn, but this “Cocker” has me guessing. And there may have
been others in the gang.’

‘There was one more,’ said Pud, and he told about the man who ‘talked
funny.’

‘Italian, probably,’ commented Mr. Kinsey. ‘He was the engraver, I
guess. Well, let’s go.’

‘You come in here,’ directed the sheriff, ‘and we’ll pick up your
friends. Your boat will be all right, I reckon, till we get back.’

Pud obeyed, and the police launch, with Mr. Casey in charge, jumped
forward. That was, as Pud told himself, ‘some launch.’ It was long
and slender, with a sharp, high bow, and it gleamed with white paint
and mahogany and shining brass. The engine was housed in a compartment
to itself, well forward, and beyond that, perched on the bow deck, was
something concealed in a waterproof canvas cover that engaged Pud’s
curiosity tremendously until he finally realized, with a thrill, that
it was a small machine-gun.

To his surprise, the police launch, which bore no name, but had the
letters ‘L. P. D.’ painted on the bow, turned almost instantly into a
broad creek which the sheriff told him was Two-Pond Run.

‘That’s Second Pond there, son; where you spent the night. First Pond’s
two miles below.’

‘Gee,’ muttered Pud, ‘if I’d known that last night――’

‘Glad you didn’t,’ said Mr. Kinsey. ‘We might not have found you at
all. Suppose you tell us about your run-in with those fellows, Lank and
Cocker. I’d like to get it straight.’

So Pud began with their arrival at Corbin, with Gladys Ermintrude
aboard, and narrated their adventures down to the evening before when
sleep had overtaken him. He had three interested and, at moments,
slightly incredulous hearers.

‘Son,’ said the sheriff solemnly, ‘you’ve got a heap o’ pluck, and I’ll
be gol-swizzled if you haven’t got a head on your shoulders, too!’

‘He’s got something else that’s better than those,’ said Mr. Kinsey,
‘and that’s luck!’

‘Aren’t you hungry?’ asked the sheriff solicitously.

‘Starved,’ laughed Pud.

‘’Course you be! Tom, got anything to eat aboard?’

The policeman shook his head regretfully. ‘Afraid not,’ he said. ‘I
don’t know, though, Henry. Look in the little locker just back of you.
There might be some crackers.’

There were! Only part of a carton, but Pud, eating them ravenously,
was sure they had saved his life! There was plenty of cool water in
a copper tank with a little nickel faucet, and he made a breakfast.
While he ate, he listened to the conversation of the others. He learned
that the sheriff’s name was Bowker, that Mr. Kinsey was a detective of
the Department of Justice who had been sent to Livermore to find the
persons who had been flooding the country thereabouts with counterfeit
money, and that the latter’s presence aboard the launch was purely
an accident. He had, it appeared, been at Police Headquarters when
Sheriff Bowker had arrived to requisition the launch and had added
himself to the party. Pud learned, too, many interesting facts about
counterfeiters and their methods. The thought that the somewhat
friendly Lank was in reality a desperate criminal, one ‘wanted’ by the
Federal Government, stirred him considerably. Why, he and Lank had
talked together just like ordinary folks! And, more marvelous still,
he, Pud Pringle, alone and unaided, had foiled the villain! _Gee!_

‘Getting nigh Cypress Creek, son,’ announced the sheriff, breaking in
on Pud’s reflections. ‘Maybe you better watch for those partners of
yours.’

A minute or so later the launch slowed down, swung gracefully to the
right and nosed into the smaller stream. Pud recognized the scene,
although the morning sunlight gave it a far different aspect. Policeman
Casey’s voice came suddenly from the bow.

‘There they are,’ he said. ‘One white and one black. On the bank over
there.’

It was rather a sorry pair who sat on the rim of the creek and kept
watch over a dilapidated rowboat. There had been no fire this morning,
and, as a matter of course, no breakfast, and only within the last
half-hour had the sun’s warmth begun to drive the chill from their
bodies. But at sight of the launch they perked up immediately, their
delight tempered by dubious surprise at the discovery that the boat
was not only a strange one, but one inhabited by strange men. The
discovery of Pud brought relief, but at the next instant Tim saw the
uniformed officer and feared that his chum was in the hands of the Law.
Indeed, it took a good while for Pud to convince Tim that he wasn’t,
and he hadn’t quite succeeded when, with the outcasts aboard and the
skiff tied astern, the police launch came in sight of the cabin.

‘You boys better stay here and keep out of sight,’ said the sheriff,
jerking his pistol holster around to the front.

‘Oh, they’ve gone,’ said Mr. Kinsey confidently. ‘Door’s wide open, you
see. Let the kids come if they want to.’

So they all went, the three men well in advance, and Tim, ever
cautious, bringing up the rear. But no hostile demonstrations greeted
the party as, leaving the launch well upstream, they advanced through a
thicket and at last came to the edge of the small clearing. The cabin
was a ramshackle affair of weathered planks and pine slabs, with a roof
patched here and there with pieces of tin or squares of tar paper.
There was a sagging porch in front, a door and two windows. A third
window looked up the stream and a crazy brick-and-clay chimney peered
over the roof at them.

Mr. Kinsey gave a hail, but there was neither answer nor sign of
life, and they went on, crossed the rotting boards of the porch and
entered the cabin. It had probably never been commodiously furnished,
and perhaps what was left behind was all there ever had been; two
bedsteads built against the walls, a rickety table, the remains of a
canvas camp-chair, and four home-made stools. The cabin was divided
by a wooden partition into two rooms of unequal size, the smaller of
which had evidently served as kitchen and dining-room and the larger
as sleeping- and living-apartment. There was a two-year-old calendar
tacked to a wall and a litter of empty food containers, crusts of
bread, fragments of paper, and other rubbish lay about.

‘Flown,’ said Mr. Kinsey dryly.

He peered about on the soiled floor, kicked about among the rubbish,
fumbled amongst the ashes of the fireplace. Finally he brushed his
hands. ‘They didn’t leave much,’ he said admiringly. ‘Plenty of ink
on the floor over there, and a strong smell of it still, but that’s
about all. Here’s where the press stood, Sheriff.’ He pointed with a
broad-toed shoe at four spots on the worn floor. ‘Those are acid stains
yonder, by that window. They moved out last night, I guess. You can see
one or two places where the press scraped between here and the door.
Must have had plenty of time, or thought they had, for they cleaned up
pretty thoroughly. Took even the lamps, didn’t they? Must have had a
boat-load! Wonder where they got that boat?’ He looked speculatively at
the sheriff.

‘That’s so,’ said the latter. ‘You didn’t see any boat besides your own
here last night, did you?’ he asked of Pud.

‘No, sir, I’m pretty sure there wasn’t any.’

‘Humph! Well, this Lank fellow probably fetched himself back in one
from the Hole. Don’t seem like they could have got far, rowing, does
it?’

‘Oh, I don’t believe they rowed,’ said the Secret Service man. ‘There
are motor-boats about here, aren’t they?’

‘Yes, but they aren’t much. Still, they might have hired one――or
stolen it, for that matter――at the Hole. We might find out if a boat’s
missing. They wouldn’t tell us, though, like as not. They’re pretty
close-mouthed in there.’

‘No harm asking, I guess.’ Mr. Kinsey gave a last look about and moved
toward the door that gave from the kitchen to the back of the cabin.
It was closed, but unlocked, and they all followed him out. There
wasn’t much there; a few yellowed bits of paper that told nothing,
a scanty woodpile, some old tin cans, a broken-handled shovel, the
battered remains of a straw hat. Mr. Kinsey made the circuit of the
cabin, passed through it again and went down the short path to the
creek. There were plenty of footprints, but he did not, as Pud thought
he should have, produce a magnifying-glass and tape-measure and study
them in the manner of the detectives of whom Pud had read. Instead he
gave them brief and unimpressed attention and went on to the bank where
the _Kismet_ had been tied up the night before. Here there were signs
of recent activity. The bank was torn and trodden by many steps, and a
gash in the edge showed where something heavy had been dragged across.
The Secret Service man peered long into the water, shading his eyes,
stepping this way and that.

‘Thought I saw something down there,’ he said at last carelessly, ‘but
it’s only a snag. Well, that’s all we can do here, Sheriff. We’ve got
to get our news somewhere else.’

‘Didn’t learn a thing, eh?’ asked Sheriff Bowker as they turned back
toward the launch.

‘Not much. I learned that they’d been printing here, and I’m pretty
well satisfied that the plates were either engraved in that shack or
finished there. Those were acid stains all right. I know what kind of
a press they used and I know that the third man, the one the boy said
talked funny, is a short, rather small guy; probably not over five
feet six, and’――he took something from his pocket and showed it to the
sheriff――‘I know this is the brand of cigarettes he smokes. Found it
in the ashes in the chimney-place. That doesn’t help much, of course,
but I’ve started on less. Besides, I know one of the three already, and
that’s enough to land them all――some day.’

The sheriff nodded. ‘I know,’ he said. ‘You fellows generally get ’em
in the end. But, say, how’d you get at the Italian’s size and his
height, eh?’

‘Well, the boy described the other two pretty well. One tall and
big-built, the other shorter, but still average height, and heavy-set.
Guess maybe you didn’t notice those beds, did you? Boxes, sort of,
filled with marsh hay. One of them was used by Lank and the fellow
called Cocker. You could see that easy enough. The other was used by
this Italian guy and there was six or eight inches of the hay at the
bottom that had never been pressed down. That’s how I figured his
height. I got his size from the size of his foot. His prints were all
over outside there. Wears about a six shoe, and has a high arch.’

The sheriff grunted. ‘Well, that’s clever,’ he allowed, ‘but I
wouldn’t want to see a man convicted on that sort of evidence.’

‘Oh, that isn’t evidence. That’s only information that may or may not
come in handy some day. Well, now let’s try this famous Swamp Hole I’ve
been hearing so much about!’

Pud had a long story to tell and many explanations to make while the
police launch, her powerful motor scarcely more than purring, went on
down the winding stream. But he was favored with as rapt an audience
as any narrator could desire, and when he told of the short and sharp
engagement in which, with the trusty boat-hook, he had repelled
boarders, Tim gasped admiringly.

‘Gosh!’ he said.

‘My golly!’ chuckled Harmon. ‘Reckon you’s a pretty fine ol’ pirate,
Mister Pud, after all!’

After that Pud brought events down to the moment, exhibiting with Mr.
Kinsey’s permission, the amazing contents of Lank’s package, at sight
of which Harmon’s eyes stuck so far out of his round black countenance
that Pud was momentarily uneasy lest they might not get back again!
And Tim was still questioning when the launch glided around a bend and
Swamp Hole lay before them.

Pud blinked. What he saw now was no more like what he had seen last
night than――well, than daylight is like dark! Now the warm sunlight
bathed the scene; the tranquil stream reflected the clear blue sky, the
green banks, the little cabins and shanty-boats, the clearings about
them, the garden-patches and tobacco-fields beyond. Tall, straight
pines and spreading oaks threw patches of shadow over which the morning
dew still lay like a silver mist. The cabins, roughly made though they
were, looked neat and homelike, and from most of them the gray-blue
smoke of morning fires still arose to hover over the little village
with a pleasantly pungent odor. Nearly every habitation had its small
truck-patch behind. In some cases the patches were of good size, and
several held strawberry beds in blossom and fruit. Tobacco, already a
foot high, stretched back over land reclaimed from the swamp, its broad
green leaves bright in the sun. Among the plants the growers were at
work, men, women, and children.

In front of a cabin two women were fashioning baskets of willow withes.
Before another an elderly, white-bearded man was making a hickory
chair. In front of the small store, in the morning sunshine, a handful
of Swampers, sighting the approach of the strange launch, ceased their
gossip and lounged unhurriedly down the path. Somehow, Pud felt a dim
sense of disappointment. This was not the Swamp Hole of his imaginings.
This was merely a pleasant, peaceful, and peaceable little village
which no more suggested dark deeds and villainy than Millville itself!

Harmon, who, in spite of a brave front, had been secretly alarmed at
the prospect of bearding the desperadoes of Swamp Hole, regained his
poise and put his head a little higher over the edge of the boat.
Protected by the presence of a policeman in uniform, a sheriff, and a
detective, he could, he believed, show himself with impunity. Tim was
at once relieved and, like Pud, disappointed. He guessed Pud hadn’t
done anything so startlingly daring after all!

The police boat eased to the few posts and old planks that served as
a pier, and the sheriff hailed one of the loungers cheerily. ‘Howdy,
Jeff! How you-all?’

‘Fair to middlin’, Sheriff.’ The man addressed was tall, lanky, very
blue of eye, and with tow-colored hair. He wore cotton trousers and the
remains of a blue calico shirt. Head and feet were bare. He smoked a
pipe as he ambled nearer, followed by his companions, and slowly let
his gaze travel from one end of the launch to the other.

‘Say, Jeff,’ went on the sheriff, ‘we picked up this skiff down yonder
on the Run. Least, these boys did. Thought it might belong to some o’
you folks in here. Happen to know it?’

Jeff viewed the skiff leisurely, walking back along the path to obtain
all particulars of its appearance. The others viewed it likewise, in
silence. Finally, ‘Well, now I dunno as I do, Sheriff,’ said Jeff. He
spoke guardedly and turned inquiringly to a neighbor. ‘You ever see it
afore, Joe?’

Joe shook a large, shaggy black head, darting a speculative glance at
the sheriff. Other heads shook, too.

‘Well, might’s well take it along then,’ announced the sheriff. ‘Reckon
these boys can find a use for it. Thought maybe, though, it belonged in
here. Saw one of your power-boats down below when we came up. Reckon it
was yours, Tolliver, wasn’t it?’

A squat, bent-backed man at the back of the gathering looked startled,
but shook his head with some vigor. ‘’Twan’t mine, Sheriff. I ain’t got
me no power-boat now.’

‘That so? Well, whose you reckon it was, Jake? I’m plumb sure it was a
Swamp Hole boat.’

The countenances of the group regarded him blankly. Jake Tolliver shook
his head again. ‘Reckon ’twan’t none of ourn, Sheriff. Ain’t but
three-four here, an’ they was all in creek this mornin’.’

‘Well, ’tain’t important. We’ll run along. These young fellows got lost
and their folks sent me to bring ’em back. All right, Casey.’

‘Sheriff,’ drawled Jeff, ‘I ain’t sure but that there’s Tally Moore’s
skiff, now I get me another look at it. It sort o’ favors Tally’s.
Hank, you take a good look, will you? You recollec’ that old skiff o’
Tally’s, don’t you?’

‘Reckon that’s Tally’s,’ answered the man addressed promptly and with
no more than a glance at the rowboat. ‘Heard him tell awhile back as
how he’d lost it.’

‘Tally Moore?’ said the sheriff. ‘Don’t believe I recall him, Jeff.
Where’s his place?’

‘’Round on backwater yonder. Second house on farther bank. Reckon
that’s his boat, Sheriff. Reckon he’ll be powerful obliged to you.’

The sheriff nodded, waved good-bye. The launch slipped forward again.
The group about the landing watched it silently, and along the creek
old folks and children in front of the cabins or shanty-boats drawn
back on the banks stopped at their tasks or play to look as silently.

The sheriff chuckled. ‘I said it wasn’t any use. They hate to answer
questions. Wouldn’t even say about the skiff till they was mighty sure
we wasn’t in here to make trouble.’

‘Looked peaceable enough,’ commented Mr. Kinsey.

‘Yes, they’re peaceable enough so long’s you don’t rile ’em,’ agreed
the other tolerantly. ‘Don’t like strangers much; ’specially when they
happen to be collectin’ taxes. They’ve got a mean way of shootin’ from
cover, too. Mighty difficult to tell where they’re located. Ain’t
much taxes goes out o’ the Hole! It ain’t a right healthy job, sir,
collectin’ in here. Some o’ these fellows ought to be in jail, but, by
and large, they’re fairly law-abiding.’

The backwater proved to be the stream that Pud had glimpsed last night,
turning off to the left just past the last cabin on the creek-bank. It
was shallow and muddy and came to an end not far distant where a cedar
thicket massed itself closely and darkly. There were three cabins along
it, one on the left side and two on the right. Good-sized patches of
tobacco or corn flanked them and spread back for some way. Getting to
the last landing, a log raft tied to stakes in the muddy bank, was
skittish work for the launch, but she finally came within hailing
distance of the small cabin and a shout from the sheriff brought a
thin, stooped, pale-faced man around a corner of it.




                              CHAPTER XX

                           TALLY MOORE TALKS


‘Reckon you’re Tally Moore,’ said the sheriff amiably.

The man, pausing on the top of the low bank, looked them over
suspiciously. Finally his gaze fell on the skiff, bumping astern, and
his faded eyes lighted a little. He nodded, as though agreeing to
something he was more than doubtful of.

‘Well, I’m sheriff up to Livermore. These boys came across this skiff
yesterday and Jeff Gosling said he thought it belonged to you. If so,
here ’tis. ’Course,’ added the sheriff, laughing jokingly, ‘you’ll have
to prove your title to it!’

‘It’s mine,’ said Tally in a hoarse voice that sounded much too large
for his thin body. ‘Lost it two-three days ago.’

‘Lost it, did you? That’s funny now. The men that had it said they’d
hired it from you. Maybe it isn’t the one, after all.’

Tally Moore’s gaze shifted. ‘Well, come to think of it, I did let them
fellers take it. Said they wanted a boat to fish in. I never seen ’em
afore, but they looked respec’able and I let ’em have it. Strangers
roun’ here, they was.’

‘I see,’ answered the sheriff carelessly. ‘Reckon they lied to you,
Moore, for they gave the skiff to these boys here.’

‘No, they didn’t,’ began the owner. Then he stopped.

‘Maybe they told you they didn’t,’ chuckled the sheriff, ‘but the boys
said they did. What did they tell you now?’

‘I ain’t seen ’em since,’ muttered Tally.

‘I see.’ The sheriff’s gaze roamed along the bank. Several stakes were
driven into it at intervals and two of them still held rusty chains and
padlocks. ‘Sort of left you without anything to get around in, didn’t
it?’ he asked.

‘Brodie, over there, he lets me have his punt when I want it,’ said
Tally.

‘Reckon you sold your motor-boat, too,’ the sheriff mused.

Tally’s eyes widened, then dropped quickly. ‘I ain’t had a power-boat
for a good while,’ he muttered.

‘What do you call a good while?’ asked the other, his eyes twinkling.
‘’Bout twelve hours?’

‘Now, you look ahere,’ replied Tally querulously. ‘I ain’t goin’ answer
no more fool questions. I got my work to do, I have.’

‘Won’t keep you much longer,’ said the sheriff soothingly. ‘How much
did you get for the power-boat?’

‘That’s my private affair,’ answered the man with sullen dignity.

‘Sure ’tis, sure ’tis! Just wanted to tell you that whatever money
those fellows paid you ain’t worth a cent.’

‘What you mean?’ demanded Tally in alarm.

‘Counterfeit.’

‘What! Counterfeit? Sheriff, you mean that?’

‘Well, I mean they were printing the stuff up on Cypress Creek. ’Course
they might have paid you in good money, but it don’t seem likely.
Haven’t got it handy, have you?’

There was a moment’s hesitation on the part of Tally. Then he turned
and ran toward the cabin. He didn’t go inside, though, but disappeared
around the farther corner. He was gone several minutes.

‘Got to dig it up, likely,’ said the sheriff. ‘’Twas his power-boat
they got, all right, Kinsey. Don’t reckon he was in with ’em, though.’

The Secret Service agent shook his head. ‘Too stupid, I guess,’ he
agreed.

Tally came back, panic in his colorless face. ‘Here’s what they gave
me, Sheriff,’ he said hoarsely. ‘Ain’t that good money?’ He yielded
the bills to the other. There were eighteen of them. The sheriff
sorted them into two lots; two hundred dollars of crisp, new paper and
thirty-five dollars in old, creased bills. The new notes he passed on
to Mr. Kinsey.

‘I reckon this thirty-five is all right,’ said the sheriff, ‘but that
new stuff――’ He looked questioningly at the Secret Service man. The
latter was already folding the bills and putting them into his pocket.

‘Counterfeit,’ he said briefly.

‘You give ’em back here!’ cried Tally. ‘Good or bad, stranger, it’s my
money!’

‘You hold your horses, Moore,’ said the sheriff. ‘Phoney money belongs
to just one person, and that’s Uncle Sam. This here’s Mr. Kinsey, of
the United States Secret Service.’

Tally stared open-mouthed. Then he swallowed hard. ‘You mean I don’t
get nothin’?’ he faltered.

‘I wouldn’t wonder a mite if you got your boat back,’ answered the
sheriff.

‘The skunks!’ broke out Tally angrily. He found worse names then, and
mingled ugly oaths with his excited ravings until the sheriff silenced
him.

‘Moore,’ he said, ‘if you want we should get your power-boat back for
you, you’d better tell us the truth about the business. Here’s your
thirty-five. How comes it they paid you that much in real money?’

‘That was first off,’ answered Tally hurriedly in his hoarse tones.
‘That was for the skiff. I sold it to ’em, good an’ all. They was two
of ’em come along about three weeks past. Strangers they was. Wanted a
boat for fishin’ an’ offered me thirty for mine. I told ’em thirty-five
an’ they paid it. I didn’t see ’em again till last night. Then one of
’em, the tall feller, comes here ’bout ten o’clock an’ gets me out o’
bed. Wants to buy the power-boat an’ we haggles awhile an’ he finally
pays me two hundred dollars, the――the――’

‘Never mind that,’ soothed the sheriff. ‘Two hundred was quite a price,
I reckon, Moore. Must have wanted it bad, I’d say. Then what?’

‘I come down here an’ unlocked that padlock yonder and started it for
him and he went off, the dirty――’

‘And that’s the last you saw of him? Or the others?’

‘Yes,’ Tally hesitated. Then he added, ‘I heard ’em, though.’

‘Heard them, eh? How’s that?’

‘’Bout two o’clock, I reckon ’twas. I couldn’t get to sleep again
after he’d waked me up, an’ I was lyin’ in the cabin when I heard
the power-boat comin’ down the creek. I’d know that engine anywhere,
Sheriff. One of them cylinders ain’t never spit just right. I heard it
go by the end of the backwater yonder and keep on downstream.’

‘About two o’clock, you say?’

‘Nigh’s I could tell. Reckon I’d been lyin’ there awake more’n three
hours. Sheriff, I needs a boat powerful. You goin’ to let me have my
skiff back, ain’t you?’

‘’Course I am. You can have it for no more’n you sold it for.’

‘’Tain’t worth thirty-five dollars,’ said Tally indignantly. ‘’Tain’t
worth more’n ten, I reckon.’

‘Oh, yes, it is. Call it thirty and you can have it.’

Tally shook his head. ‘Twenty, Sheriff,’ he offered.

‘Not a cent less than thirty. Want it?’

‘No! ’Tain’t worth it. I can buy Brodie’s punt for fifteen.’

‘All right. Anything more you want to know from this man, Kinsey?’

‘I don’t think so. I want to tell him, though, that I could cause his
arrest for having counterfeit money in his possession, and that I’m
likely to do it if he doesn’t stick right around here in case I need
him to identify those men later. Get that, Moore?’

‘I’ll be right here, sir,’ Tally assured him earnestly.

‘Now,’ said Sheriff Bowker, when the launch was once more making its
way down the creek, ‘we’ll put you boys aboard your boat next. Casey,
you know the short way to the Run from here?’

‘Don’t believe I do, Henry.’

‘Well, it’s first to your right. It’s a sharp turn, sort of hidden.
I’ll watch for it.’

‘Mr. Bowker,’ said Pud, ‘does that skiff belong to us?’

‘Well, now, I don’t know.’ The sheriff rubbed his nose reflectively.
‘Maybe it does, Anson. Why?’

‘I was just thinking that we’d rather have had that twenty dollars he
offered,’ answered Pud.

‘Oh, that’s it? Well, now, look here, son. That boat’s worth thirty
if it’s worth a cent. Tell you what you do. You take it back up to
Millville and see can’t you sell it there.’

‘I’d rather have the boat,’ declared Tim. ‘It’s a pretty good one, Pud.
All it needs is calking and painting.’

‘We-ell,’ agreed Pud doubtfully. ‘Maybe it will be kind of fun to have
a rowboat handy.’

‘Ain’ ’at the truth?’ observed Harmon solemnly.

Pud and Tim exchanged glances. Here was a complication. It was plain
that they would have to acquire Harmon’s interest, if he possessed
any. Pud wondered if he did. Although at the start of the expedition,
Harmon’s status had been that of a menial, Pud felt that he had since
then attained to equality. Yes, beyond a doubt Harmon belonged, and,
belonging, owned a third――well, anyway, a part of that skiff!

They took the turn that Pud had passed by the night before and almost
at once debouched into Two-Pond Run. It was annoying to reflect that
had he taken it, too, he would have found Tim and Harmon without
difficulty. Still, in that case perhaps he wouldn’t himself have been
discovered by the police launch, and if he hadn’t he would have missed
all the exciting incidents of the morning.

‘You reckon they went on out, don’t you?’ the sheriff was inquiring of
Mr. Kinsey. ‘’Tain’t likely, I suppose, they’d maybe run up around into
Little Fox or Marsh Creek.’

‘Not a bit,’ was the reply. ‘When this fellow Thorbourn saw his boat
going off down the stream last night, he must have figured that the
jig was up. Maybe he didn’t know who was in it, Sheriff, but he did
know he’d left this bundle of the queer in it, and I guess he figured
that River Swamp wasn’t healthy any longer. We’ll find they’ve made for
the railroad, I guess. Some one’s bound to have seen that motor-boat
between here and Corbin.’

‘They could get the train at Corbin,’ said the sheriff.

‘Not without being seen by too many folks. They want to save the press
and the plates. If they hadn’t, they’d have destroyed them back there,
Sheriff. I thought maybe they had. Thought I might find them in the
creek. But they hadn’t. Took them with them and will look for new
headquarters somewhere. I wouldn’t be surprised if they’d gone right on
down the river to Mumford.’

The _Kismet-Jolly Rodger-Vengance_ was just where they had left her
an hour and a half before, and the boys were soon transferred. The
skiff was untied from the police launch and made fast to the stern of
the other. Pud was none too cheerful about the change, for he would
vastly have preferred staying with the sheriff and Mr. Kinsey and
the round-faced Mr. Casey and sharing in the further pursuit of the
counterfeiters, but that, of course, was out of the question.

‘Reckon,’ said the sheriff, ‘you can’t get lost going down, boys.
Follow the Run straight south, past First Pond, and you’ll come out at
The Flat. Then it’s two miles, about, to Corbin. And, say, when you get
there, if I was you I’d stop and telephone your folks. I’ll get word to
them, too, but I reckon maybe they’d like to hear from you personal.’

‘All right, sir,’ agreed Pud. ‘And thanks for finding us, and
everything. And I hope you’ll catch the counterfeiters.’

‘Well, this gentleman here’ll have to worry about that,’ chuckled the
sheriff. ‘But from what I hear of his crowd, those counterfeiters
haven’t got a chance! You expecting to get back home to-night?’

‘Gee, I don’t know,’ answered Pud. ‘I guess it’s too far, though.’

‘Well, maybe ’tis. Anyway, you talk to your folks and fix it all right
with them, son. And, say, if you stop at Livermore going up, come
in and see me. Any one’ll tell you where to find my office. Maybe I
mightn’t be in, but if I was I’d be glad to see you and show you ’round
a bit. What say, Casey?’

The policeman was beckoning secretively and the sheriff tramped forward
and held a whispered conversation with him. Once Pud heard him exclaim
‘Well, I swan!’ in rather amazed tones, and, having exclaimed, he
turned to view the occupants of the adjoining boat with a new and
peculiar interest. Pud felt slightly uncomfortable. Perhaps Mr. Casey
had been told about that rooster that had made a breakfast for them
four days previous! But the sheriff was chuckling now, chuckling and
nodding to Mr. Casey. Then, clearing his throat, he said: ‘Anson, I
reckon you’d better make a point of stopping in and seeing me before
you go on home. There’s――er――well, now, there’s certain formalities
that ought to be attended to. Being mixed up in this matter, more or
less, maybe you’d ought to make an affidavit or something, eh?’

Pud agreed, somewhat puzzled. Tim’s countenance showed that he didn’t
hold with affidavits and would much prefer not having anything further
to do with the Law.

‘Yes, well, now,’ went on Sheriff Bowker, ‘you see me at my office this
afternoon or to-morrow morning. Don’t forget!’

‘No, sir, we won’t,’ answered Pud with scant enthusiasm.

‘Better not,’ said Mr. Casey, smiling broadly. ‘It’s going to be to
your advantage, boys, as the advertisements has it!’

‘Yes, that’s so,’ chuckled the sheriff. ‘Well, see you later, then. Let
her go, Casey.’

Good-byes were exchanged and the police launch surged away, churning,
and fled down the stream, her wash breaking against the bank in
miniature waves. Pud and Tim waved as long as it was in sight and then,
with one accord, jumped toward the locker that held food!




                              CHAPTER XXI

                        MR. LISCOMB IS GRATEFUL


The return voyage began at twenty minutes to ten o’clock. At eleven
they made The Flat, and, as Pud swung the launch’s nose toward the
outlet of the river, they looked toward the end of the nearer island.
There were two fishermen there. One was clad in khaki trousers, a
cotton shirt, and a wide-brimmed, sugar-loaf-crowned straw hat. He was
bent motionless at the end of a weathered old punt, and beside him on
the seat, apparently no less intent on the business in hand than his
master, sat a yellow hound.

‘Gee,’ murmured Pud, ‘I wonder if he’s been there ever since!’

They did the two miles to Corbin in quick time, the current aiding,
and tied up at the dock where they had stopped before. To Pud was
delegated the not altogether pleasant task of communicating by
telephone with Millville, and he set off with little relish for the
nearest drug-store. Fortunately, Lank and Cocker had not found the
small cardboard box in which Pud kept his money. Probably they would
have made a thorough search of the launch in the course of time, had
it remained with them, but, as it was, they seemed not to have even
looked into the lockers. Anyhow, the money was safe, and the fact made
it possible for Pud to telephone without the necessity of reversing
charges. Even so, it required all of ten minutes to get his house
in Millville. Then his mother’s voice came to him, quite as if she
were just around the corner of the prescription counter, instead of
thirty-odd miles away as the crow flies!

‘Pud, dear, is that you? Are you sure you’re all right? Your father
just telephoned that they’d found you. Where _have_ you been? Didn’t
you know we’d be worried to death at not hearing a single word from
you?’

‘Well, but, Mother, I _did_ write! I――’

‘Yes, I know, dear. It just came this morning, that letter. It had
been missent to some other place. You know, dear, you don’t write
very carefully sometimes. And there was a letter from your Great-Aunt
Sabrina, too, telling how you caught the robber that night. She wrote
quite a lengthy letter, and sent a piece from the Livermore paper that
praises you up wonderfully! I think it was most heroic, Pud, dear, and
you must tell me all about it when you get back. Are you coming home
to-night?’

‘Gee, ma, I don’t see how we can! We’ve got to stop in Livermore and
see the sheriff there. Say, was Aunt Sabrina mad about us staying in
her house that night?’

‘Why, no, of course she wasn’t! She was just awfully thankful, I
suspect, that you were there. My, she’d have been heartbroken if the
thief had taken her silver, Pud!’

‘Well, he was going to take it, all right,’ responded Pud. ‘He had
it all dumped in a bag and――’ Just then a voice broke in to remind
him that he had talked three minutes and he ended hurriedly. ‘Back
to-morrow afternoon, sure, Ma! Sorry you were worried. Yes’m! Yes’m!
Good-bye!’

Well, that hadn’t been so bad, after all, he reflected, mopping his
perspiring brow as he backed from the booth. And the Livermore paper
had had a piece about them catching the robber! Gee, that was great! He
hurried back to spread the news to Tim and Harmon. Tim said they could
maybe buy a copy of the paper when they got to Livermore. They bought
enough gasoline to get them back to Millville and enough food to last
them much farther! But they had missed two meals, and none of them were
quite certain that they’d ever get thoroughly caught up!

Pud figured that they’d have to do about nineteen miles before they
reached Livermore again. It was twenty minutes to twelve when they cast
off at Corbin, and if they averaged five miles an hour they should
reach Livermore by four. They debated the question of making a return
visit to Aunt Sabrina. Tim was in favor of it, but Pud, despite the
fact that Aunt Sabrina was doubtless grateful to them, displayed no
enthusiasm. Besides, there was Harmon. Aunt Sabrina would undoubtedly
view Harmon askance. She was, as Pud recalled, convinced that negroes
were invariably thieves. She might allow him to sleep in the stable,
but even that was uncertain. On the whole, Pud decided, it would be
better to camp somewhere below the town and not bother Aunt Sabrina.
Tim accepted the verdict with a sigh. Probably now he never would taste
that lady’s cocoanut cake!

Various well-remembered landmarks met their gaze as the launch chugged
down the Fox, but it seemed a week rather than three days since they
had last viewed them. Tim found the branch up which they had fled from
the kidnapers and pointed it out, getting a disgusted ‘Humph!’ from
Pud. It was mid-afternoon when, having lunched to repletion, Pud’s
still rather torpid gaze lighted on something ahead and to the right
that had a strangely familiar look. Then he remembered.

They were back at the clearing where they had rescued Gladys Ermintrude,
and there, just as they had last seen it, was the faded green
shanty-boat, with, as Pud uneasily discovered the next moment, smoke
issuing from the stovepipe in its roof. The river was wide enough to let
them pass well distant, and Pud instantly swung the launch’s bow toward
the farther side. The tumble-down wharf, farther along, peered around
the corner of the shanty-boat and Pud set his gaze on it and wished it
were already abeam. Tim, too, had now recognized the scene and drew
Pud’s attention.

‘_S-sh!_’ Pud whispered, motioning for silence. ‘They’re in there!’

‘Oh!’

Then a spot of color appeared on the shanty-boat’s narrow deck, a hand
waved, and a friendly ‘Oo-hoo!’ came to them.

‘It’s Gladys Ermintrude,’ said Tim eagerly.

‘Well, what if it is?’ inquired Pud coldly, refraining from joining the
other in signals of response.

‘Oo-hoo! Come on over!’ called Gladys Ermintrude.

Pud scowled. If only she had stayed inside a minute or two longer!
Tim said, ‘Let’s see what she wants, Pud.’ Pud hesitated, muttered,
and swung the launch across the stream. ‘All right,’ he said as they
neared the shanty-boat and Gladys Ermintrude, ‘only don’t blame me
if――if something happens!’

‘Hello,’ said Gladys Ermintrude gayly as they came close.

‘Hello,’ replied Tim.

‘Hello,’ echoed Harmon from the stern.

‘Huh,’ muttered Pud, and viewed her suspiciously. Then he turned his
suspicions toward the interior, wondering whether the girl had been,
as before, the sole occupant of the cabin. Gladys Ermintrude was
explaining that she had been back there for two days and was having a
perfectly glorious time.

‘Huh,’ said Pud. ‘What you been doing?’

‘Oh, lots of things,’ answered the girl brightly. ‘Fishing and hunting
and――’

‘Cooking,’ supplied Pud. ‘Your ma said you were a good cook.’

Gladys Ermintrude accepted the tribute with unconcealed delight, to
Pud’s vast astonishment. ‘Well, I just am,’ she declared. ‘I made the
grandest cake yesterday!’

Tim’s eyes grew luminous and he moistened his lips.

‘I wish you’d come then instead of to-day. Pa and Uncle Asa ate the
last of it this morning.’

Tim’s eyes gloomed and he sighed. Tim had a notable weakness for cake.

‘I suppose,’ observed Pud, foiled in his first attempt to create
confusion, but determined still, ‘you’ll be going into moving pictures
this fall.’

‘Moving pictures? Oh, my, no! What a funny idea!’

‘I’ll say so,’ agreed Pud heartily, ‘but it was your idea and not mine.
You said you were studying to be a screen star, didn’t you?’

‘Did I?’ Gladys Ermintrude’s gaze wandered afar. ‘How very strange. I
simply don’t remember――’

From beyond the open window came a sudden sound that might have been
a short cough. It had its effect on all who heard it. Pud grasped the
wheel again and darted a meaning look at Tim. Tim’s hand moved toward
the fly-wheel. Harmon stared in solemn suspicion. Gladys Ermintrude
laughed lightly and continued rather hurriedly:

‘Yes, I do remember now. I did say something like that, didn’t I? But
of course it was merely――merely a childish fancy.’

‘Gee,’ said Pud, ‘you’re full of childish fancies, aren’t you? Like
fancying you were kidnaped and that your name was Gladys Evinrude
and――and――’

‘Aw, Pud,’ murmured Tim deprecatingly.

‘Well, she did――is! She told a lot of whoppers and made goats of us,
didn’t she? Had us chasing up and down the river in the dark and――’

‘Oh, well,’ said Tim, ‘what of it? It was sort of fun, I guess――’

‘I don’t tell “whoppers,” Pud!’ declared the girl heatedly. ‘Maybe I
did let you think things, but――’

‘Think things! Gee, I suppose we “thought” you were kidnaped before you
told us! Didn’t you say, right there where you are now, that you’d been
kidnaped from your happy home and that――’

‘Why, sakes alive! How ever can you think up such outrageous stories?
I’m sure I never said I’d been kid――’

Another sound from within!

‘_Start her up!_’ whispered Pud hoarsely.

‘Well, maybe I did say so,’ corrected Gladys Ermintrude flurriedly,
‘but――but I’m sure I didn’t mean to make any trouble――’

‘Aw, that’s all right,’ muttered Tim. ‘You mustn’t mind Pud. He just――’

Then, as he turned the wheel over and, having failed to put the spark
on, got no response from the engine, appalling sounds came from
the shanty-boat’s interior, sounds that were unmistakably those of
heavy footsteps, and, before the alarmed Tim could try the engine a
second time, a tall figure appeared behind the lesser form of Gladys
Ermintrude! It was a man who confronted them, a tall, wide-shouldered,
bearded man. Pud’s heart sank. This was undoubtedly the ‘grateful’ Mr.
Liscomb!

‘Well, boys,’ said the apparition in a surprisingly pleasant, deep
voice that, because of its striking similarity to hers, placed him
instantly as Gladys Ermintrude’s father, ‘we meet at last!’

To Pud’s surprise, Mr. Liscomb was smiling in a very friendly fashion,
and, seen close-to, was not at all the desperate-looking person Pud had
thought him. Just the same, Pud’s suspicions were not wholly quieted,
and, although he cleared his throat, no words came. At least, not from
Pud; nor yet from Tim nor Harmon. Gladys Ermintrude, though, still had
the power of speech.

‘Yes,’ she was saying, ‘these are the boys who were so very kind to me,
Father. This is Pud and that one’s Ted――no, Tim, and that’s Harmon back
there. Harmon cooks wonderfully, Father.’

‘Does, eh? Well, Tibbie, if I had a wonderful cook I’d look after him
better. They’ve let him sit out in the sun until he’s all tanned up!’

Pud and Tim smiled embarrassedly, but Harmon gave the joke full value
and exploded into ‘Yeah! Yeah! Yeah!’ Then he as suddenly subsided into
silent solemnity. Mr. Liscomb chuckled and, one arm over his daughter’s
shoulders, turned his gaze back to Pud.

‘You look mighty familiar to me,’ he said. ‘Live around here, Pud?’

‘No, sir, Millville,’ Pud managed.

‘Millville? Guess I don’t know any one in Millville. What’s the rest of
your name?’

‘Pringle,’ said Pud. ‘Anson Pringle.’

‘Anson Pringle? Then your father’s Pringle, of the _Courant_ up there!
You’re Anson Pringle, junior, eh?’

‘I suppose so,’ allowed Pud. ‘Folks call me Pud, usually.’

‘Well, well! Why, I know your father, son, know him right well. Both
newspaper men, you see. I’m assistant editor of the Corbin _Journal_.
You tell him you met Bill Liscomb, will you? Tell him you ran off with
his girl!’ The speaker chuckled, and Pud ventured a doubtful grin.

‘She said――’ he murmured. ‘I mean, you see, we didn’t
understand――exactly――’

‘Oh, that’s all right, Pud! You don’t need to apologize. Here’s the
culprit right here.’ He gave Gladys Ermintrude a hug. ‘She’s a pretty
good sport, boys, but she’s got an imagination about ten sizes too
large for her, and she reads too many silly stories and sees too many
foolish movies. But we’re going to change all that, aren’t we, Tibbs?
We’re going to cut out the novels and most of the movies for awhile,
eh?’

Gladys Ermintrude assented readily, even gayly.

‘Yes, we had a little――ah――conference the other day after she got home
and she promised to be more careful of her statements. She’s going to
get the upper hand of that powerful imagination of hers pretty soon. I
wouldn’t be surprised if, after a while, she got so you could believe
every word she tells you!’

‘Why, Father!’ murmured the girl in shocked tones. ‘How can you speak
so before strangers?’

‘Oh, I guess they can stand it,’ her father chuckled. ‘Which way are
you boys heading? Down the river, eh?’

‘Yes, sir,’ answered Pud, ‘we’re going home. We’re going as far as
Livermore to-night.’

‘I’ll bet you’ve had a fine time, too. It’s a wonderful thing to get
away into the quiet of the woods and streams for a few days now and
then!’

‘Yes, sir,’ agreed Pud, wondering if the word ‘quiet’ was just the
right one!

‘Wish I could ask you-all to stay and have supper with us,’ went on Mr.
Liscomb genially, ‘but I guess we’d be rather crowded, and I’m not too
sure we’d have enough for all hands. Sort of depends on what my brother
brings home when he comes.’

‘We――I guess we’d better not,’ said Pud. ‘Thank you very much, sir.’

‘Not at all. Glad to have you if you want to take a chance. I feel sort
of indebted to you for the way you looked after this young lady, boys.
Mighty fine of you to do it. My regards to your father when you get
home, Pud. And good luck to you!’

Gladys Ermintrude waved as long as they were in sight. So did Tim. Pud
had a somewhat thoughtful look when, presently, Tim came forward and
seated himself.

‘I suppose,’ said Pud after a moment, ‘it’s sort of a habit with her.’

‘What is? Who?’

‘Gladys Evinrude: telling those fairy stories like she does. You know,
Tim, I used to sort of――sort of――’

‘I’ll say you did,’ chuckled Tim.

‘Well, I never told regular whoppers like she does,’ Pud defended. ‘I
never said anything that wasn’t so, did I? Did you ever know me to tell
a lie?’

‘No-o, but――but, gosh, you can make folks think things that ain’t so,
Pud!’

‘Sure. But I don’t tell lies. She does, you might say. Only she doesn’t
mean ’em to be lies, I suppose. She――she’s fanciful. That’s her
trouble. I guess we oughtn’t to be too hard on her, Tim.’

‘Well, who was hard on her, I’d like to know? I wasn’t!’

‘I guess a fellow _can_ see too many movies,’ continued Pud
thoughtfully. ‘That is, he can, if he has a――an imagination to start
with. I guess I’ll cut them out, Tim.’

‘All of them?’ asked Tim anxiously.

Pud shifted uneasily on his feet. ‘Well, maybe the right sort of
pictures don’t do any harm,’ he compromised. ‘Of course that Gladys
Evinrude――’

‘It isn’t Evinrude; it’s Ermintrude.’

‘It ain’t either,’ chuckled Pud. ‘It’s Tibbie! Anyway, what I was going
to say was――was――’ But Pud had lost the thread of his discourse, and
before he could pick it up again, Tim spoke.

‘Say, she looked kind of――kind of pretty to-day, Pud.’

‘Pretty?’ Pud considered briefly. ‘Well, I guess maybe she looked
better than she did that other time, but she’s awfully skinny!’

‘I don’t think she’s skinny,’ defended Tim warmly. ‘Of course she isn’t
what you might call _fat_, like――well, like――’

‘She’s skinny,’ declared Pud flatly. ‘Say, I wish I’d asked her one
question, Tim, just one question!’

‘What’s that?’ inquired Tim.

‘Because,’ chuckled Pud, ‘she’d have had to tell the truth, with her
father there and everything.’

‘What question?’

‘Why,’ Pud snickered, ‘whether he spanked her or not! I’ll bet you
anything he did!’




                             CHAPTER XXII

                          THE PIRATES RETURN


They made surprisingly good time to the mouth of Fox River and then
covered six of the seven miles that lay between that point and
Livermore in an hour and twenty minutes. It certainly seemed as though
the launch knew it was going home and wanted to get there! It was
still only a little past four o’clock, and they might have got back
to Millville that night if it had not been for their promise to call
on the sheriff. Of course, they would have had to finish the voyage
in early darkness, but Pud had done so much night navigation that the
thought brought no dismay. But there was the agreement with Sheriff
Bowker to be considered, and so, instead of keeping on past the city,
they looked for a place to spend the night.

Tim didn’t think much of the idea of looking up the sheriff, and said
so more than once. ‘What’s he want to see us for?’ he asked. ‘We
told him all we knew, didn’t we? Suppose he wants to put us in jail
as witnesses. They do that sometimes. Or suppose he heard about that
chicken! I say let’s go on home, Pud.’

‘No, sir, we can’t do that. We promised. Besides, that Mr. Casey said
it would be to our――our advantage, didn’t he?’

‘Oh, gosh, they’ll say anything to get you in their clutches, the
police will!’

‘The sheriff isn’t the police,’ said Pud. ‘He’s different.’

‘He arrests folks just the same, doesn’t he? I don’t see much
difference!’

‘Well, you will. Anyway, we said we’d do it and we’ve just got to,
haven’t we?’

‘I suppose so,’ replied Tim regretfully.

The best they could discover as a tent-site was the edge of a
brick-yard, an unattractive place littered with old cans and broken
bricks and exposed to the public view on all sides. Indeed, a line of
trolley cars buzzed past only a short block distant. But they could see
nothing better, and they were rapidly approaching the wharves of the
town. So they put the launch as close to the muddy shore as possible
and landed by means of the skiff.

It was not until they had the tent ashore that Tim asked abruptly:
‘Say, Pud, know what day this is?’

Pud had to think a minute, but he finally said it was Saturday; adding,
‘What of it?’

‘Then to-morrow will be Sunday,’ answered Tim triumphantly, ‘and I
guess even sheriffs don’t go to business on Sunday!’

‘Gee, I wonder!’ exclaimed Pud. ‘But he said we could see him either
to-day or to-morrow, didn’t he? Maybe he forgot about it being Sunday,
though.’

‘I’ll bet he did. So what’s the good of stopping here? He wouldn’t
expect us to wait until Monday, Pud.’

‘No, but’――Pud looked at his watch and then at a vanishing trolley
car――‘but it’s only twenty minutes past four. We’ll go and see him now!
It won’t take long to get there by trolley, Tim!’

‘Oh, gosh!’ muttered Tim.

A few minutes later, leaving Harmon in charge of operations, they went.
A ten-minute ride took them to their destination and a friendly but
curious conductor directed them. He had wanted to know, when Pud had
asked for the sheriff’s office, if they were going to give themselves
up! They found the Court-House easily and made their way along a
corridor until a tin sign over a glass-paneled door brought them to a
halt. Pud didn’t know whether to knock or enter without knocking, so he
compromised by rapping his knuckles once and turning the knob at the
same instant. Tim followed inside looking so much like a criminal that
Sheriff Bowker would have been justified in arresting him on suspicion!

‘Well, hello, hello!’ greeted Mr. Bowker. ‘Come in, boys, and make
yourselves at home!’ He removed his legs from a corner of his desk and
arose to pull a couple of chairs forward from the row that stood along
one wall. ‘Well, you got here pretty quick, didn’t you? I just heard
from――Wait a minute, though. I’d better see if I can get Mr. Hosford.
Maybe he’s gone home a’ready, but if he hasn’t――’

The sheriff took up the telephone and, while Pud and Tim stared about
the rather bare and not too clean room, engaged in a brief conversation
with some one. The sheriff’s pleased announcement into the mouthpiece
to the effect that ‘they’re here, if you want to see ’em’ brought no
joy to Tim. The conversation appeared to satisfy the sheriff, though,
for he beamed when he had hung up again.

‘Well, that’s all right,’ he declared, rubbing his big hands together.
‘He’s coming right over. Lucky you didn’t turn up five minutes later,
for he was just going home.’

‘Who, sir?’ asked Pud.

‘Mr. Hosford. He’s president of――never mind now, though. He’ll be here
in a jiffy. I was going to tell you that I just got word from Police
Headquarters that Kinsey nabbed his men about two o’clock, boys! Quick
work, eh?’

‘Really?’ exclaimed Pud. ‘Lank and Cocker and――and the other one?’

‘All three, and a boatload of stuff, too, he says. They were in that
power-boat of Tally Moore’s down near Trowman’s Landing, this side of
Mumford. Reckon they were meaning to go ashore there. I ain’t heard the
particulars yet. Well, I reckon Tally’ll be glad to get his boat back.’

‘Was there――was there any fighting, sir?’ asked Pud.

‘I didn’t hear. Kinsey had three men with him, though, in the police
launch, so I guess those fellows didn’t kick up much. Quick work, I’ll
say!’

‘Yes, sir,’ agreed Pud. ‘Gee, I wish I’d been along! Wouldn’t it have
been great, Tim?’

‘Yes,’ said Tim. But somehow it sounded a lot more like ‘No’!

At that minute the door opened and a man of about forty years entered
briskly.

‘Afternoon, Mister Sheriff! So these are the boys, eh?’

‘Yes, sir, here they are. Boys, this is Mr. Hosford, president of the
Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Hosford, this is Anson Pringle, and this is
Timothy Daley. Anson’s pa runs the _Courant_ up to Millville. Maybe you
know him.’

Mr. Hosford regretted that he hadn’t that honor as he shook hands with
Pud and Tim. Then he took the chair that the sheriff set for him and
smiled at his audience. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘I guess we don’t have to make
a ceremony of this, young gentlemen. I’ve brought the check with me and
I’ll just hand it over, with my congratulations.’ He put a hand into an
inner pocket and produced a long, slim oblong of pale-green paper. ‘We
made this out to Anson Pringle?’ He looked inquiringly at the sheriff.
‘That’s what you said, eh?’

‘That’s right, Mr. Hosford. It was him that had the bundle of money,
so――’

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ said Pud faintly.

‘Why, I’m talking about the reward,’ said Mr. Hosford. ‘You knew there
was a reward of five hundred dollars offered, didn’t you?’

‘I reckon he didn’t,’ laughed the sheriff. ‘We didn’t say anything to
him, Mr. Hosford. Thought we’d wait and――’

‘You mean,’ gasped Pud, ‘that my father offered five hundred dollars
for――for me?’

‘Well, hardly,’ answered Mr. Hosford, smiling, ‘although I dare say
you’d be well worth it. No, this reward was offered a week or so ago by
the Livermore Chamber of Commerce and the banks for information leading
to the apprehension of the persons engaged in circulating counterfeit
bank-notes hereabouts. Thought, of course, you knew about it. The
sheriff here and a Mr. Kinsey, sent by the Department of Justice awhile
back, assured us that you had earned it and so――well, here it is, my
boy! And my congratulations go with it!’

Still dazed, Pud accepted the check, looked at it vaguely, and then
turned to Sheriff Bowker. ‘You mean that――that it’s _mine_?’ he asked
incredulously.

‘Sure is, Anson! Earned it, didn’t you? If you hadn’t given the
information you did, they’d still be searching for those fellows, I
reckon.’

‘Well, I must go along.’ Mr. Hosford again shook hands with the boys,
nodded to the sheriff, said ‘Good-afternoon!’ and departed. With the
closing of the door behind him, Tim darted from his seat.

‘Gosh, Pud, let’s see!’ he stammered.

Pud and he both looked then. ‘Livermore Trust Company,’ they read. ‘Pay
to the order of Anson Pringle Five Hundred Dollars.’

‘Gosh!’ said Tim in an awed voice. ‘What are you going to do with it,
Pud?’

Pud shook his head helplessly. Then he brightened as he exclaimed:
‘’Tain’t all mine, you silly chump! It’s half yours!’

‘Mine!’ said Tim. ‘I guess not! What did I have to do with it? You’re
crazy!’

‘I’m not either! I’ll leave it to Mr. Bowker if――’

‘Boys, you’ll have to leave me out of it,’ protested the sheriff,
waving a hand. ‘You’ll have to settle whose it is between you, I
reckon.’

‘Well, it’s half his,’ declared Pud stubbornly, ‘and――say, Tim, we
never even thanked him!’

‘You mean you didn’t,’ Tim corrected. ‘I guess he understood, though,
that you were sort of――of flabbergasted, Pud.’

Somehow in the next five minutes they said good-bye to the sheriff,
promised to call and see him the next time they were in Livermore, and
found their way to the street. The idea of taking a car back to the
launch was utterly repellent. There was too much to be said! So they
started back on foot, and when, at the first corner, a telephone sign
met Pud’s eyes, he dragged Tim inside a store and disappeared himself
into a booth. He was out five minutes later, flushed and triumphant.

‘I got Dad, at the office,’ he proclaimed. ‘He doesn’t believe it about
the reward. He just kept on saying, “Yes, yes, Pud, I know, I know.”
He thinks I’m joking, but when he sees that check――’ Pud broke off to
chuckle enjoyably. ‘I told him we’d be back by one o’clock to-morrow,
Tim, and he said he’d tell your father when he went home.’

They went on, taking up the discussion where they had dropped it.
Tim was very determined not to share the reward and Pud was just as
determined that he should. The argument lasted most of the way back to
where they had left the launch, and Tim’s consent was finally obtained
when Pud threatened to tear the check up. ‘I will,’ he declared firmly;
‘I’ll tear it up right now and stuff the pieces down that hole, Tim!
Why, gee, we were all in it! Why, it was you who heard those fellows
first that time up on Cypress Lake. You said, “I hear a boat, Pud,” and
I said “Let’s shout,” and――’

‘Oh, all right,’ said Tim, ‘only it doesn’t seem fair. And as to me
hearing that boat first, I didn’t, Pud. It was Harmon.’

‘Was it? Well, anyway――’ Then Pud stopped abruptly. ‘Say, Tim, what
about him, eh? Harmon, I mean.’

‘Gosh, that’s so!’

They went on in thoughtful silence for a short distance. Then, ‘He’s
a pretty good guy, that Harmon,’ muttered Pud. ‘He――he’s been mighty
handy, the way he’s cooked and――and all!’

‘Sure,’ said Tim. ‘Of course, in a way――’

‘Yes, I know that, but when you think of it――’

‘Sure! That’s what I meant!’

‘Well, then, if we each give him twenty-five――’

‘Yes, seems to me that would be fair,’ agreed Tim readily. ‘Gosh, fifty
dollars would be a lot of money to Harmon!’

‘You think we ought to give him more?’ asked Pud anxiously.

‘No, I don’t, Pud. I think fifty’s fair, don’t you?’

‘Yes, _I_ do, but I thought maybe you thought it wasn’t. He’s a pretty
good fellow and I wouldn’t like to feel that――that we weren’t doing the
right thing. There he is now. He’s got the tent up, too! And I believe
he’s started getting supper! Say, won’t he be tickled when――’

‘Won’t he!’

They started running.

                   *       *       *       *       *

It was well short of one o’clock the next day when the launch poked its
nose under the bridge at Millville and chugged on toward Andy Tremble’s
boat-yard. Pud stood proudly at the wheel, Tim officiated at the
throttle, and Harmon sat on the stern planking with his bare feet on
the seat below and observed the passing world with haughty grandeur, a
grandeur befitting a colored gentleman recently come into a fortune!

Behind the launch came the skiff, the only visible trophy of the
pirates’ expedition, since, doubtless to Harmon’s disappointment, not
one town had been sacked. And yet, as Pud had observed farther down
the river that forenoon, they hadn’t done so badly for pirates new to
the business, for they were returning with five hundred dollars and a
perfectly good rowboat, and without the loss of a man!

As the launch turned the bend above the island and the landing came
into sight, Pud blinked his eyes. For a moment it looked as if all
Millville had gathered to welcome them home, but a second look showed
that the group ahead numbered no more than ten persons; a dozen at the
outside. There were Pud’s father and mother, and Tim’s father, and
Harmon’s father and mother and two small sisters, and Andy Tremble and
Mr. Ephraim Billings and Marshal Bud Garvey and――oh, gee――Mr. Tully,
the minister! Pud wished then that he had taken the new names from
the bow. Here it was a Sunday and there was that lettering down there
staring right at everybody and spelling _Jolly Rodger_! They were
waving now, and Pud waved back, and so did Tim. And there was Andy
Tremble pointing at something and laughing fit to kill himself, and
Bud Garvey laughing too. And they weren’t looking at the name on the
bow, either. They were looking farther astern. Pud looked, too. Then he
wilted.

Harmon, stiff with dignity, solemn as a judge, sat with folded arms
upon the after deck, while, behind him, placed there unknown to Pud and
Tim, the disreputable white flag adorned with the skull-and-cross-bones
spread itself to the breeze!


                                THE END




 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Printer’s, punctuation, and spelling inaccuracies were silently
   corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Inconsistent hyphenation and compound words were made consistent
   only when a predominant form was found.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUD PRINGLE, PIRATE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


