The Project Gutenberg eBook of Traveling publicity campaigns
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Traveling publicity campaigns
        educational tours of railroad trains and motor vehicles

Author: Mary Swain Routzahn

Release date: April 8, 2025 [eBook #75816]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Russell Sage foundation, 1920

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELING PUBLICITY CAMPAIGNS ***





                       SURVEY AND EXHIBIT SERIES
                      EDITED BY SHELBY M. HARRISON

                          TRAVELING PUBLICITY
                               CAMPAIGNS

                          EDUCATIONAL TOURS OF
                          RAILROAD TRAINS AND
                             MOTOR VEHICLES

                                   BY
                          MARY SWAIN ROUTZAHN

                   DEPARTMENT OF SURVEYS AND EXHIBITS
                        RUSSELL SAGE FOUNDATION

                             [Illustration]

                                NEW YORK
                        RUSSELL SAGE FOUNDATION




                          Copyright, 1920, by
                      THE RUSSELL SAGE FOUNDATION

                        WM. F. FELL CO·PRINTERS
                             PHILADELPHIA

                            [Illustration]




                           EDITOR’S PREFACE


In the endeavor to spread information widely and well a multitude
of ventures have been carried on in recent years. Interesting among
these has been the combining of educational material and activities
on the one hand with modern facilities for transportation on the
other--the putting of exhibits, demonstrations, motion pictures, and
other campaigning equipment on railroad trains, trolley cars, and
motor trucks so that they may tour a whole city, a county, or cross a
continent.

A glance at the appendix to this volume will show how extensive this
form of educational effort has become. Beginning a dozen or more years
ago with trains which showed improved methods of farming the list
includes trains for teaching health, sanitation, safety, and food
saving; trolley cars carrying exhibits on child welfare; and automobile
trucks equipped to give motion picture shows on health and other
subjects. Recently some of the trucks have also carried equipment for
demonstrating methods of food canning, or for dispensary service. While
the traveling campaign centering in the railroad car has had the longer
history, developments in the educational use of the motor truck have
been of such number and variety as to indicate, if one may venture in
probabilities, relatively greater future activity for it.

The extensive use of this method of disseminating knowledge in the
past, and the probable continuation and extension of it in some form,
have made it seem desirable to bring together as much as possible of
the working knowledge which has been gained in planning and conducting
these campaigns, and to put it at the disposal of those interested in
popular forms of educational work. The material here presented is thus
not so much an evaluation of the traveling campaign method of spreading
information as a review, or perhaps better, an anthology of practical
experience thus far formulated, plus the observations of the author of
the volume. The practice of those who have had first-hand contact with
the problems and possibilities involved will undoubtedly have value for
future planning. It is hoped, however, that the experience here set
down, instead of forming a sole reliance or boundary to effort, may
become a stimulus to the play of fresh ingenuity in creating new forms
of illustrative material.

But as to the question of evaluation, until more data on these
campaigns are recorded, that will still need to be done by those
responsible for each particular tour and conversant with the particular
conditions and requirements of the case. It is a familiar and not
unnatural tendency, in selecting an avenue by which to reach the
public, to adopt a method already used by someone else without waiting
to get full information on its advantages and limitations. This happens
in large part no doubt because the information desired is often hard
to get without extensive inquiry. A second purpose of this volume is
to bring together in brief compass the available data on traveling
campaigns and thus to lessen the burden of extended inquiry for those
who will need to make practical decisions.

In addition to a pooling of the facts gained through the practical
conduct of traveling publicity campaigns it is further hoped that the
material here assembled may provide a sort of nucleus or center of
gravity which will attract criticisms and further data. The criticisms,
in the course of time, may lead to a fuller treatment of the subject,
and afford a better basis for determining whether the advantages
of campaigns set upon wheels outweigh their inherent disadvantages
when viewed in relation to particular projects or other campaign
possibilities.

In the meantime grateful acknowledgment is made to the many who have
already been generous in answering inquiries and furnishing information
gained from their daily contact with traveling campaigns, and to those
who have furnished photographs and offered many helpful suggestions.

                                                     SHELBY M. HARRISON.




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

EDITOR’S PREFACE                                                     iii

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS                                                 xi


CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY                                                           1


CHAPTER II

PURPOSES AND ADVANTAGES OF TRAVELING CAMPAIGNS                         3

The Train as an Event                                                  4

A Tour as a Campaign “Feature”                                         6

Novelty and the Danger of its Wearing Off                              6

Not a Quick Method                                                     7

Traveling Campaigns and Results                                        8

Cost of Tours                                                          8

As Between Trains and Trucks                                          10


CHAPTER III

HOW TRAINS HAVE BEEN USED IN CAMPAIGNING                              13

Agricultural Trains                                                   13

Health Trains                                                         20

War Propaganda                                                        21

A Government Safety First Train                                       23

Trolley Tours                                                         23


CHAPTER IV

CAMPAIGNING WITH MOTOR VEHICLES                                       25

Motion Picture Tours                                                  25

A Typical Motion Picture Motor Tour                                   26

Traveling Dispensaries                                                27

Cleveland Children’s Year Special                                     27

Motor Truck Clinics in Italy                                          30

A Government Child Welfare Special                                    30

Speaking Tours by Automobile or Motorcycle                            34

A Motorcycle Knight of Health                                         34

Carrying the Canning Kitchen to the Food Supply                       37

“Caravans” of Trucks                                                  39


CHAPTER V

ADVANCE PUBLICITY AND ORGANIZATION                                    42

Importance of Good Advance Work                                       42

General Advertising                                                   43

Specialized Appeal                                                    44

Arrangements for Distributing the Attendance                          44

Arrangements for Local Co-operation in Management                     45

Getting the Advance Work Done                                         46

Qualifications of the Advance Agent                                   49

The Job of the Advance Agent                                          50

Assignments of Advance Work for Local Committees                      52

Explanatory Statement for Local Co-operating Committees Regarding the
Pennsylvania Food Conservation Train                                  54

Reception Committee                                                   55

Committee on Newspapers                                               56

Advertising Committee                                                 57

Committee on Special Delegations                                      59

Committee on Co-operation of Churches                                 61

Committee on Schools                                                  62

Committee on Attendance of Foreign Language Groups                    63

Committee on Speaking                                                 64

Committee on Personal Canvass                                         64


CHAPTER VI

THE MESSAGE OF THE TOUR                                               66

Choice of a Topic                                                     67

What to Tell                                                          70

Making up the Program                                                 71

Programs of Exhibit Trains                                            73

A Program Combining Demonstrations and Exhibits                       76

Outdoor Speaking at Trains                                            77


CHAPTER VII

EXHIBIT CARS                                                          78

Types of Cars                                                         78

Traveling Accommodations for Staff Members                            80

Treatment of Car Interiors                                            80

Exhibits                                                              81

Use of the Space for Display                                          84

Placing Exhibits                                                      87

Arrangement of Subject Matter                                         88

Some Observations from Practical Experience                           90

Arrangement of Car for Demonstrations                                 92


CHAPTER VIII

THE TOUR OF THE TRUCK OR TRAIN                                        94

The Places to be Visited                                              95

Receiving the Visitors                                                97

The Rate of Progress in Exhibit Cars                                  99

Distributing the Attendance                                          101

Explaining the Exhibits                                              104


CHAPTER IX

FOLLOW-UP WORK                                                       106

Getting the Subject Talked About                                     107

Printed Matter for Distribution                                      109

Publicity Following the Train’s Stop                                 110

Organization of Local Forces                                         111

Checking Up Results                                                  113


APPENDIX: Reference Lists of Train, Truck, Trolley, and other Traveling
Campaigns                                                            117

BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                         137

INDEX                                                                143




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                           OPPOSITE PAGE

The New York State Healthmobile                                       10

Interior of Exhibit Car of the “Peach Special”                        14

Health Cars of the Louisiana Department of Health                     20

Cleveland Children’s Year Special                                     28

Truck With Extension Devices                                          29

Traveling Dispensaries                                                30

Interior of Child Welfare Special of the Federal Children’s Bureau    31

Canning Squad and Portable Kitchen                                    38

A Transcontinental Truck Tour                                         39

Poster Advertising the Coming of an Exhibit Train                     44

Group of Objects Expressing One Idea                                  70

Demonstration Car                                                     76

An Outdoor Program                                                    77

Flat Cars Used for Displaying Captured German Trophies                80

Interior of Health Exhibit Car                                        84

A Well Arranged Exhibit Car                                           85

Food Conservation Train of New York State College of Agriculture      86

Arrangement of Railroad Car Interior                                  87

Car Especially Designed for Cooking Demonstrations                    92




                                   I

                             INTRODUCTORY


The tour of the peddler with a pack or cart stocked with goods for sale
and a budget of news for free distribution, and that of the patent
medicine man with his illustrated lecture of misinformation that sells
his dubious wares are forms of traveling publicity campaigns long
familiar in rural districts.

Of recent years many peddlers, carrying new ideas and useful
information but no goods for sale, have been going about the country
representing national and state government bureaus and private
organizations. Their wares are helps to better crops, better houses,
better health. Their mode of traveling has progressed from wagons to
trains and from trains to motor trucks. The size of the enterprise
has varied from a single wagon or automobile with a speaker and a
batch of leaflets to a train of railroad cars or trucks that carry a
traveling exhibit rivaling the “Greatest Show on Earth.” The tours
extend from a jaunt through the county or the districts of a city
to a transcontinental journey. Whatever its form, if the purpose of
the enterprise is to spread information or ideas, or to promote a
community program, it is of interest from an educational and publicity
standpoint.

Although traveling campaigns have been many and varied and the method
has been in use for a number of years, to our knowledge there has been
no attempt up to this time to set down the methods and experiences, the
successes, failures, and difficulties of the various campaigners.

Believing that this method of promoting social programs will continue
to be employed, whatever the type of vehicle used to convey travelers
and their outfits, we have gathered information about a number of
campaigns and offer it here, together with comments and suggestions
for the benefit of those who may be considering the method for the
first time or who have tried it and wish to compare their experiences
with those of others. The descriptions and suggestions are drawn
from accounts of about seventy-five tours of trains, trucks, trolley
cars, and other vehicles, obtained from printed reports, articles,
letters, replies to questionnaires and interviews, as well as from the
observations and experience of the writer.




                                  II

            PURPOSES AND ADVANTAGES OF TRAVELING CAMPAIGNS


The popular educational tour on wheels is a method of carrying news
and facts from town to town, instead of distributing this information
in wholesale manner to many towns at the same time through newspapers,
letters, posters, and other familiar avenues for disseminating
information quickly and widely. This use of a method resembling more or
less the old-time place-to-place spreading of the news but in a modern,
up-to-the-minute dress, even under the most favorable conditions
involves a considerable outlay in money, a great deal of hard work,
careful and detailed planning, and equally careful oversight throughout
the journey and the follow-up period. Therefore the person or group
contemplating such an undertaking will naturally wish to consider
carefully its efficiency as a method of publicity before embarking on
it.

In some instances the reason for using the truck or train is that
it may be routed to remote rural districts not well served by the
more modern methods of news distribution. Wherever it goes, however,
the train or truck has two chief advantages as a publicity method;
first, it is an economical way of bringing before scattered audiences
well-equipped speakers or graphic and otherwise attractive illustrative
material--economical because a single group of speakers or unit of
exhibits may in this way be made to serve a large territory; and,
second, its visit to each town may be made an important event,
something which creates news and which may appeal to the imagination of
people generally.

The tours that are described in the following pages suggest just a
few of the unusual and graphic features that may be assembled in a
traveling show to attract attention and to make facts and ideas more
easily understood and remembered. The train or truck in addition,
as already suggested, to bringing into town especially talented or
well-informed speakers and demonstrators, brings also equipment for
demonstrations that may be bulky, expensive, or for other reasons
difficult to duplicate and distribute for display; also rare objects
such as the people in the communities visited would not be likely to
see at all, except as they are brought in for this brief visit.


THE TRAIN AS AN EVENT

The visit of the train, like the revival meeting, the fair, or the
Fourth of July celebration, may be made such a striking event in each
community that its program gets and holds the attention of many people
who would not read a newspaper article or go to an ordinary meeting to
learn about the same topic.

Such an event may be especially timely if a new movement or plan is
about to be launched within the territory to be covered. The brief
demonstration presented before a representative group of citizens
gathered to meet the truck or train often paves the way for the
organization of a permanent activity in the community. This is true
because the method often allows for a more concentrated educational
effort than can be effected in the same time through other types of
campaigns. For example, the occasional visit of the agricultural
special, demonstrating improved methods has, in many instances,
preceded the forming of a county organization of farmers to devote
themselves continuously to studying and experimenting in better farming.

A train or truck campaign, well handled, will help to give freshness
to ideas which may become stale if they continue to reach the people
in the same familiar forms. Whatever the subject matter or purpose of
a local movement for community education or welfare, both the workers
or leaders and the people who form the audiences are refreshed by
variations from familiar methods of presenting the ideas that need to
be gone over time and again in order to get the greater numbers to
listen, to understand, and to assimilate them. The local effectiveness
of the work of the county agricultural agent, or the tuberculosis
committee, or the movement for better rural schools may sometimes
be stimulated through the visit of traveling campaigners bringing
reinforcements in the way of enthusiasm, news gathered along the route,
or old ideas illustrated in new and striking ways.


A TOUR AS A CAMPAIGN “FEATURE”

One occasion when a train tour may be desirable is when the need is
felt for a unique feature or “stunt” in a campaign that employs a
great variety of methods. The Liberty Loan trains were expected to
add “punch” to local campaigns and to make bond selling easier. When
a vigorous effort is being concentrated on an issue or an idea, a
tour of prominent speakers, or striking exhibits, or both, may add a
spectacular element and secure much publicity; first, by getting direct
attention for the idea, and second, by providing material for “news”
both in the press and in the everyday talk of the people.


NOVELTY AND THE DANGER OF ITS WEARING OFF

As a novel device for attracting attention both train and truck have
a real though possibly a short-lived value. In many sections of the
country the exhibit train has long ago become familiar, and already
those who are seeking some new form in which to get their story over
are equipping and operating motor trucks. In a few years these, too,
may lose their power to arouse curiosity. However, the fact that the
novelty of a device wears off does not necessarily destroy its value.
While the novelty of the method itself may wear off, the contents of
the train and the program of the itinerant campaigners leave no end of
possibilities in the way of fresh attractions.

In the use of graphic methods there have been great advances within
quite recent years. So far, only a few of the newer forms of expressing
information in picturesque and dramatic forms have been used in truck
and train projects. There is no reason why trains and trucks should
not continue indefinitely to draw expectant visitors looking for the
new features that may be added this year, just as a circus, a fair, or
exposition is repeated successfully year after year. The exhibitor who
uses an attention-getting device for the first time in any locality
is to some extent responsible for the future success of any similar
traveling shows in the places visited. People who went to see the first
train or truck are likely to visit the second or stay away, according
to the impression made by the first. This responsibility can be met
through careful preparation and good management.


NOT A QUICK METHOD

A point sometimes urged in favor of the educational tour is its rapid
method of carrying information over a wide area. It is undoubtedly the
quickest way of displaying the same objects to a number of communities.
But if you wish the people throughout your territory to have the same
information as nearly as possible at the same time, any method in which
the material is duplicated and sent out to all points at once from a
central place is obviously more suitable than conveying the message
from place to place.


TRAVELING CAMPAIGNS AND RESULTS

One objection frequently raised by those who have conducted educational
tours is that they are quickly forgotten and bring no lasting
results. This is probably a valid objection to the incompleteness
of a particular campaign rather than to the method itself. If the
follow-up work is not planned just as carefully and carried out as
conscientiously as the tour itself, there is no reason to expect that
people will remember it or that action will follow. Every form of
publicity, whether a newspaper article, leaflet, lecture or motion
picture would be just as quickly forgotten if it were an isolated
effort and not part of a well-rounded educational campaign. In the
section on follow-up work, page 106, methods are discussed of fixing
the impressions made on the minds of visitors to the train and of
inducing them to apply the instructions given.


COST OF TOURS

What it costs usually plays a larger part in the choice of a publicity
method than any other single factor. Analysis of the whole plan of the
tour is needed in order to decide regarding the wisdom of spending
money on it. An advance estimate ought to indicate whether a given
expenditure on a traveling campaign appears likely to bring larger
returns than the same amount spent on some other method.

The cost and the scale of different enterprises vary so greatly and
prices are so different from year to year, that it is impossible to
estimate, on the basis of one project, what another one is likely
to cost.[1] By writing to the sources of information listed in the
appendix, beginning on page 117, the reader will probably be able to
obtain detailed information about the cost of any enterprise of a type
that may interest him. Several directors of tours have reported that
they consider the method too expensive. It was found too expensive
in one northern state because the initial outlay was so great in
comparison with the relatively short season during which the truck
could be operated. In one southern state the expenses of an automobile
tour were found to be out of proportion to the total budget of the
organization. A number have reported the method inexpensive, but they
may not have charged against their budget items that others have
been obliged to include. Cars and hauling may have been provided by
a railroad company; the truck may have been a gift; the specialists
and demonstrators may have been regular members of the staff of the
organization and their salaries not charged against the budget of the
tour. In some cases the truck drivers have been volunteers. All of
these things need to be taken into account in making any decision on
the basis of the amount a tour has cost someone else. It is safe to
say that, under the most favorable circumstances, a well-conducted
traveling campaign is not a cheap method of publicity, and the
organization considering it should be very sure that the enterprise is
timely and especially suited to their purpose before embarking on the
venture.


AS BETWEEN TRAINS AND TRUCKS

The most serious drawbacks to a train are that it must stay on a
railway siding, is frequently inconvenient to reach, and its location
hot and dusty in summer, lacking in open space where crowds can gather
comfortably, and, worst of all, is noisy. Still another drawback is
that the shape of a car is not adapted to the effective display of
exhibits and it is difficult also to handle large numbers of visitors.

[Illustration: THE NEW YORK STATE HEALTHMOBILE

Carries motion picture equipment for both indoor and outdoor exhibition
as well as dispensary equipment for holding clinics.]

Even with these awkward handicaps, however, the railroad car has the
advantage of greater size as a setting for exhibits and demonstrations.
Exhibits and equipment for demonstrating, moreover, may be permanently
set up in a train of cars, so that everything is in readiness for
visitors at the time when the train reaches its stopping place. But the
truck is a place for storing rather than displaying exhibits, which
means that each time a program is given, material must be unpacked and
set up in tents, in a hall, or out of doors.

Good points for the truck are that, roads and weather permitting, the
truck campaigner may go wherever and whenever he pleases and stay as
long as he likes, independent of the rails and schedules that limit
the freedom of a train tour. Even bad roads have not prevented some
campaigners from reaching what had seemed to be inaccessible districts.

While the trucks have in certain ways greater adaptability to varied
conditions than trains, the latter will undoubtedly continue to be
employed where its own special uses are of paramount importance and
particularly in cases where the railroads may find it possible, as in
many instances in the past, to provide transportation free or at a
nominal price. The truck, on the other hand, is probably only at the
beginning of its usefulness in educational and publicity work. There
are still untried possibilities of contriving methods for the carrying
of materials especially adapted to a quick display during a short
stop in all sorts of places, which, it would seem, might invite to a
fascinating degree the inventive genius of those interested in the
popular spread of useful information.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The following records of tours may prove at least suggestive: A
three-car train, which traveled through Pennsylvania for five months in
1918, had running expenses of approximately $325 a week. This included
traveling, living expenses, and salaries of three staff members, the
initial cost of exhibits and printed matter, and repairs. It did not
include the salaries of three additional demonstrators, or the initial
cost of rebuilding the interiors of the cars, or any expenses for
hauling of the cars.

A motion picture tour with an automobile truck, traveled for
twenty-eight weeks in 1917 in Maryland at an expense of $124 a week.
This included the fuel and repairs for the car, expenses of the field
staff, rentals of films, and various miscellaneous expenses connected
with the operation of the tour.




                                  III

               HOW TRAINS HAVE BEEN USED IN CAMPAIGNING


For a number of years, with the co-operation of the railroads, state
agricultural colleges, departments of health, and private state
organizations have carried on educational and organization work through
demonstration trains. The war propaganda which utilized practically
every known form of publicity did not overlook train, truck or trolley.
One or more of these was used in the campaigns for Liberty Loans, food
conservation, and child welfare.

Descriptions of a few of these trains will illustrate the varied types
of campaigns in which they have been employed.


AGRICULTURAL TRAINS

A Peach Demonstration Train started on a tour in November, 1919, for
the purpose of encouraging and stimulating the peach industry in
the East Texas Fruit Belt. The train consisted of two baggage cars
containing exhibits of insect pests that menace the peach industry,
life-sized models of diseased and perfect fruit, and actual branches
of affected peach trees, and a box car containing a tractor, orchard
plows, and various other kinds of farm machinery needed by an
up-to-date orchardist.

Regarding this train Mr. P. T. Cole, Agricultural Commissioner, St.
Louis Southwestern Railroad of Texas, writes as follows:

 The cars were moved on local freight trains nearly all the time,
 although on a few occasions we were moved by a through freight. The
 cars were opened to the public at 9 a.m., and the farmers were taken
 through in groups of about fifteen and a thorough lecture given
 them with explanations in detail regarding the various exhibits. We
 usually let the school children go through, but did not allow them to
 interfere with the work we were giving the farmers. In the afternoon,
 at about one o’clock, we accompanied the farmers to a nearby orchard
 taking with us pruning tools, the power sprayer, and the tractor.
 In the orchard we gave lectures on pruning, and then pruned about a
 dozen trees, or sometimes as many as fifty, after which we gave them
 a thorough spraying. This demonstration usually consumed the greater
 part of the afternoon, but we would return to the cars and discuss the
 different problems of orcharding with the growers and in many cases
 they remained with us until dark.

 The growers in most cases were very enthusiastic over this work, and
 we had some excellent demonstrations. Some of the very best were given
 in orchards where we had done the same work last year, and where it
 was an easy matter to point out the beneficial results of proper
 spraying and pruning. We have a number of fine demonstrations to go
 back to next year to show the results of the work we have just done.

 As a result of this work a great many spray machines have been bought,
 and there is more pruning and spraying in progress now than I have
 ever seen before.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF EXHIBIT CAR OF THE “PEACH SPECIAL”

A baggage car containing exhibits to show the diseases and insect pests
that menace the peach industry, and the methods of destroying them. See
page 13.]

The following account[2] of a dairy train in Illinois is supplied by
the College of Agriculture of the University of Illinois:

 The first dairy train which we assisted in operating was on the
 Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad from Danville, Illinois, to
 Cypress. The equipment consisted of an engine, three ordinary coaches
 used for lecture work, an automobile box car with side and end doors,
 and a flat car. We had four cows in the automobile car and led them
 direct from this car onto the flat car for demonstration purposes. We
 had a railing built around the flat car and also a removable platform
 between the two cars. We also had a milking machine installed in this
 box car which could be observed in operation by opening its side
 doors. This was all the exhibit material we had, as our stops in
 the towns lasted only from one to two hours. We had a special train
 crew and a definite train schedule to follow. As soon as we would
 reach a town we would fill up the three lecture coaches, and three
 speakers would start at once to give short talks. After talking for
 about fifteen minutes, the speakers would trade cars. In this way
 each audience heard at least three speakers, and at the conclusion of
 these lectures the audience was conducted to the rear car where a cow
 demonstration was given. At the conclusion of the cow demonstration
 the milking machine demonstration was given in the automobile car. I
 might say that the dairy train was highly successful. This was due, I
 think, largely to its being well advertised previous to its operation.

 Later, another dairy train was operated in a similar manner except
 that four lecture coaches were used instead of three. On account of
 the warm weather, it was found advisable to give a large number of the
 lectures out-of-doors. The coaches were used only during rainy weather
 or in towns where, because of congested passenger and freight traffic,
 they were not given a good location. In some places our audiences were
 so large that we could not accommodate them in four coaches. In that
 case all the lecture work was given from the flat car on the rear end
 of the train.

The Pure Seed and Home Power Special was the name given to a three-car
train run jointly by the Soo Line, the Wisconsin Bankers’ Association,
and the Wisconsin College of Agriculture in the interests of more
efficient farm methods. The pure seed car contained a display of the
finest Wisconsin grown seed grains, reinforced by explanations driving
home the vital facts concerning the advantages of pure-bred seed. The
home power and home convenience car showed gasoline engine, power
churn, washing machine, separator, home lighting plant, and other
conveniences. A lecture car and a tourist sleeper for the lecturers and
demonstrators completed the equipment. Sixteen counties were visited
and over seven thousand people came to see the train.

The Hessian Fly Special, as described below, is an example of a highly
specialized effort toward accomplishing a very definite purpose:

 Since its first appearance in Kansas as an important factor in
 wheat production, the Hessian fly has alternately disappeared and
 reappeared. During the forty-four years of its known presence in the
 state it has produced seven different out-breaks, the last and the
 greatest of which destroyed not less than fifteen million bushels of
 wheat of the 1915 crop. Believing that not only the attention of the
 farmers could best be called to the seriousness of the infestation,
 but also that more interest could be created in the control methods
 and that a larger number of wheat growers could be reached within a
 short time, the Kansas Agricultural College decided to request the
 Santa Fé Railway Company, which had a large mileage in the infested
 districts, to run a Hessian fly train....

 A chart of the infested districts was furnished the dean of the
 Extension Division who met with the officials of the Santa Fé and
 prepared a schedule consisting of sixty-two stops. It was left
 entirely with the college to decide as to the best time to run the
 train and it was felt that, inasmuch as the methods of control of
 the fly should begin as soon as possible after harvest, the best and
 most opportune time for the train would be the week just before the
 beginning of harvest.

 The train consisted of a baggage car, two modern steel day coaches,
 each with a seating capacity of eighty-eight persons, which were
 used for lecture cars, and a private car, consisting of parlor and
 observation, dining and sleeping compartments. It was understood
 at the beginning that the train was to be an exclusive Hessian
 fly train and thus it was advertised as the Hessian Fly Special,
 operated by the Kansas State Agricultural College in co-operation
 with the Santa Fé. The speakers consisted of three entomologists
 of the Agricultural College, one entomologist of the United States
 Department of Agriculture, the head of the Department of Agronomy,
 the superintendent of Farmers’ Institutes of the college, and
 one county demonstration agent. In addition to the lecturers,
 the company consisted of the agricultural agent of the Santa Fé,
 the publicity agent of the Santa Fé, the publicity agent of the
 college, and representatives of some of the principal newspapers and
 farm publications. The divisional superintendents and roadmasters
 accompanied the train over their respective divisions of the road.

 Addresses were made at all of the sixty-two places scheduled. In
 fact, at nearly all the places the attendance was such as to require
 two speakers and, on several occasions, it required a third speaker
 to accommodate the large crowd. If the attendance did not exceed two
 hundred, the two speakers took care of them in the lecture cars, but
 where the crowd was over two hundred the over-flow was taken in the
 waiting room of the depot, where a speaker was provided. Where there
 was not an opportunity for the insect train to stop, a lecturer was
 dropped off to hold a meeting at the depot or an up-town place. Later,
 the man would be picked up by one of the regular trains and left at
 a station where the Hessian Fly Special was scheduled to stop. Or
 a man would be sent ahead on a regular train to hold a meeting and
 would later be picked up when the Special came through. In a few cases
 speakers were taken to neighboring towns in automobiles. During the
 entire trip every speaker on the train gave practically the same
 Hessian fly talk. The entomologists and the agronomist of the college
 prepared the speech, copies of which were furnished not only to the
 speakers but also to all the railroad officials and publicity men who
 accompanied the train. The publicity men prepared beforehand all the
 articles to be used by the newspapers in the places where addresses
 were made. In other words, every address given and every newspaper
 article published had just one message and that was the seriousness
 of the infestation and what should be done to protect the crop of the
 next year. It is the opinion of the writer that much of the success
 of the Hessian fly train and the good accomplished were due to the
 fact that all departments and all persons concerned were together,
 and that nothing was said or done but what met with the approval and
 recommendation of every one. The fact that the very methods advocated
 for the control of the fly were in keeping with the very methods
 recommended by the Agronomy Department and which the progressive
 and successful wheat growers knew should be practiced for maximum
 yields, appealed to the better judgment of even the most skeptical
 ones. The time allowed for each stop was about forty minutes. The
 speakers usually arranged for a few minutes’ discussion before closing
 the meeting. Specimen cases, charts, and illustrated material were
 used in nearly all lectures. As the men left the lecture cars or the
 waiting room they were given circulars on the Hessian fly and the
 preparation of the seed bed for wheat. The Hessian fly circular was
 printed primarily for the occasion. It was simply a timely article
 emphasizing the methods of control and closing with a brief life
 history of the fly.

 In nearly all cases large crowds met the Hessian Fly Special and the
 total attendance for the week was approximately seven thousand.[3]


HEALTH TRAINS

In the early days of the tuberculosis movement cars were extensively
used in traveling health campaigns. A pioneer in carrying the message
of health over a state on exhibit trains was Dr. Oscar Dowling,
President of the Louisiana State Board of Health. His health train
made its initial trip in 1910 and with many changes since that time
has continued in service. After the first tours, made with cars loaned
by the railroad, had demonstrated the popularity of the train, the
State Board of Health purchased two coaches. One was fitted up as
an inspection car with a part of it given over to living and office
quarters, and the other as an educational exhibit car, containing
displays of models, charts, and laboratory specimens. Later, two more
cars were purchased for living quarters and the inspection car was
turned into a laboratory car.

A practical application of the lessons taught on the tour was made
by inspectors who accompanied the train. In each place visited they
inspected and scored buildings in which the sanitary conditions
imperilled public health, the reports of their findings being
given publicity while the train was in town. This train attracted the
attention of health workers in other states and has made a number of
trips outside of Louisiana in response to their requests.

[Illustration: HEALTH CARS OF THE LOUISIANA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

Showing the garage end of the laboratory car. Here a Ford is stored
ready for use by the inspectors in a quick tour of each town visited.]

The Board of Health of Kansas has used a Pullman car to carry exhibits
on child welfare, tuberculosis, and other health topics. A woman
physician and public health nurses traveled with the car and gave
health talks and explained exhibits. Sixty-nine cities and towns were
visited, the stops varying from one to four days. The purpose was
chiefly educational, but an attempt was made to discuss their health
problems with individuals.

Another example of the Health Special was a car sent out by the West
Virginia Board of Health during 1919, and described in letters sent in
advance to the newspapers as:

 A fine, vestibuled coach, equipped with electrically driven models,
 health posters, exhibits of living bacteria, exhibits of Red Cross
 work, a moving picture machine, and a small but complete chemical and
 bacteriological laboratory in one end.


WAR PROPAGANDA

During the war, trains were used in several states to carry the
message of food conservation and more especially to encourage home
canning by simple methods. The Pennsylvania Food Administration, in
co-operation with the Pennsylvania State College of Agriculture
and the Pennsylvania Railroad, ran a train of three cars during the
first and second summer of the war. The train included an exhibit car
containing posters and graphic devices showing why food conservation
was necessary; and two cars where skilled demonstrators illustrated
methods of baking with wheat substitutes and the canning and drying of
fruits and vegetables.

A Save the Surplus Special of two cars toured New York State
encouraging home canning and helping practically to increase it.

During the Fourth Liberty Loan campaign exhibit trains were used in
some districts for displaying war trophies, and during the Fifth
Liberty Loan several shiploads of war equipment and trophies were
distributed over the whole country for display on trains which were
sent into the rural districts and cities. Each train included several
flat cars and a baggage car loaded with captured cannon, German
aëroplanes, machine guns, trench mortars, gas warfare apparatus and
gas masks, and thousands of other interesting trophies. One of our own
tanks, dressed up in its fighting clothes, was an interesting feature
of the exhibits. Each train was accompanied by an armed guard of
returned soldiers, sailors, and marines.

In Missouri a Women’s Patriotic Special made a two weeks’ trip carrying
women speakers who gave talks on the Red Cross, food conservation, and
other war topics.


A GOVERNMENT SAFETY FIRST TRAIN

Probably the most elaborate exhibit train that has yet been sent out
was the Safety First Train of the Department of the Interior, which
toured sixteen states during a period of four months and was visited
by over a half million people. This train, which was furnished by
the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, consisted of twelve steel cars,
including a sleeper and diner, and was hauled by two powerful passenger
locomotives. Six governmental departments and the American Red Cross
had exhibits relating to safety work, the purpose of the tour being “to
acquaint the people with the work that the Federal Government is doing
every day to protect its citizens against injury and death, and with
the measures it takes to promote the health and comfort of the people.”


TROLLEY TOURS

Campaigns have been conducted on interurban lines in several states.
For about three months the Woman’s Committee of the State Council of
Defense ran a Children’s Year Special over much of the interurban
trackage of Michigan, in the interests of better babies everywhere, and
as a help in saving Michigan’s quota of the one hundred thousand babies
the Children’s Year was to save.

The car was divided into three sections--the first part contained
an exhibit, the second a compartment in which babies and children
brought for tests were undressed and dressed, and the third a model
examination room where tests and examinations were made by skilled
physicians and trained nurses.

The Woman’s Committee of the State Council of Defense in Massachusetts
also ran a children’s welfare car. The interior of the car was given
over to exhibits of literature and posters on food conservation
and child welfare. The front and back platforms were enlarged and
surrounded by arm railings. On one platform a kitchen was arranged,
where a lecturer gave actual demonstrations of the various food
substitutes; on the other a trained nurse instructed mothers upon the
care and feeding of children in wartime.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] Letter from E. A. Clark, College of Agriculture, University of
Illinois.

[3] Journal of Economic Entomology, Vol. 9, No. 1, 1916, George A.
Dean, Entomologist, Kansas State Agricultural Experiment Station.




                                  IV

                    CAMPAIGNING WITH MOTOR VEHICLES


Traveling motion picture shows, dealing with health and other subjects,
traveling dispensaries and tours demonstrating uses of trucks and thus
advertising trucks themselves, are the chief educational uses of motor
vehicles reported in response to an inquiry widely sent out.


MOTION PICTURE TOURS

Of these, the traveling motion picture show seems to have been longest
in the field. Many state health departments and state tuberculosis
associations have been and still are conducting a part of their
educational work by this means. Recently the Red Cross has carried the
story of its overseas work into remote rural districts in a certain
section of the country by means of a truck equipped with pictures
and machine. A returned overseas worker travels with the truck and
gives talks about past achievements and future plans. An organization
interested in promoting the use of commercial and industrial films has
a number of well equipped trucks which are sent to city parks as well
as country districts to give open-air entertainments.


A TYPICAL MOTION PICTURE MOTOR TOUR

The North Carolina State Board of Health has used a health car equipped
with electric lighting plant, motion picture machine and accessories,
together with a large selection of health and comic films, all in
charge of a lecturer and machinist. This car was sent out in response
to invitations to give health entertainments in co-operation with local
committees, the latter sharing the expense.

The plan was to give substantially the same program in a different
place in the county each day during one week. Each of these places
then received a return visit during each of two succeeding weeks with
a complete change of program. A single program usually consisted of
five or six reels of motion pictures, including three health films
and scenic and comedy films. A victrola was carried with the car to
provide a preliminary musical program and a musical accompaniment with
the comic films. While the health films were being shown, the lecturer
made running comments. Free health literature was on display at a
convenient place to be given out in response to requests. The programs
were given in the school house, church hall or outdoors. Where special
illumination was needed strings of incandescent lights were provided.

The staff carried with them a complete camping, cooking, and sleeping
outfit.[4] Their schedule usually included two programs a day and 12
visits to as many places during a week.


TRAVELING DISPENSARIES

The use of motor trucks for dispensaries or clinics seems to be
increasing rapidly. A number of traveling tuberculosis, dental, child
welfare, and baby clinics are reported from many parts of the country,
not only for rural districts but for large cities. Some of these
dispensaries on wheels are intended chiefly to provide service, that
is, to examine people, rather than for the purpose of publicity or
education. In this case the truck is simply a convenient method of
extending clinical work to districts that have no dispensaries, or to
the homes of patients who cannot or will not go to the dispensary.
But even where service is the main purpose, these trucks are of value
educationally, particularly in this early stage of their use when their
novelty attracts attention to the clinics. Other traveling dispensaries
are intended chiefly to demonstrate to the community the need of
establishing, permanently, some such service as the dispensary gives
during its brief stop-over.


CLEVELAND CHILDREN’S YEAR SPECIAL

A traveling truck dispensary was adopted as a feature of the Children’s
Year by the Children’s Year Committee of the Cleveland Council of
Defense. Mr. J. Dean Halliday, Director of the Bureau of Health
Education of the Cleveland Department of Health, who planned the
construction of the truck and directed its use later, had charge of a
similar campaign for the American Red Cross Tuberculosis Commission in
Italy.

The type used both in Cleveland and in Italy[5] as shown in several
illustrations (see cuts opposite pages 28 and 30) has side tents,
which, when set up, provide fair-sized rooms. The tent on the left was
used as a waiting and dressing room for the mothers who brought babies
for examination; that on the right as lecture and exhibit room. Here
posters and model outfits for the baby were displayed and literature
was given away. The body proper built on the carriage of a large army
truck was fitted out as a model dispensary with examining tables,
scales, measuring stands, desk, cabinet for supplies, electric lights,
and hot and cold water. The equipment included a screen and motion
picture machine which could be set up on top of the truck for evening
programs. In Cleveland the truck was driven by members of a volunteer
women’s motor corps organization, uniformed for the purpose and carried
a physician, a nurse, and a sanitary patrolman, all assigned from the
Health Department.

[Illustration: CLEVELAND CHILDREN’S YEAR SPECIAL

Interior of truck fitted up as a dispensary with steps let down for
visitors. See pages 27 and 28.]

[Illustration: TRUCK WITH EXTENSION DEVICES

 The usefulness of this truck for demonstrations and exhibitions is
 more than doubled by the tents which are strapped to the sides of the
 truck in travel and set up at each stopping place, and by the motion
 picture apparatus which is set up on the roof. See page 28.]

The tour included sections of the city known as “death places” because
of their high infant mortality rates. As the crowd gathered the
physician in charge gave a short talk on the object of Children’s
Year. While he was thus engaged the district nurse circulated through
the crowd and, picking out a likely mother and child, persuaded
her to step forward with her child when the physician called for
babies to be examined. It was found necessary to do this in order
to get the remainder of the mothers to fall in line quickly. The
physician examined the child and, if normal, it was quickly weighed
and measured and the regular Children’s Year forms filled out, one
for the committee’s record and a duplicate for the mother. The mother
was advised to report at regular intervals to the city’s nearest
prophylactic dispensary where she would receive instructions as to
how to keep her baby well. For the sake of its effect, she was given
a card signed by the mayor, stating that she was entitled to this
service and urging her to avail herself of it. She then passed on to
the tent containing exhibits where child hygiene and other posters
were displayed and educational pamphlets distributed. The exhibits and
literature were usually presided over by the uniformed motor corps
driver, although on some occasions an extra nurse was carried for the
purpose. In an average afternoon, from twenty-five to thirty babies
would be examined.

Although city nurses were constantly carrying on routine work in the
districts visited, many cases of contagion and sore eyes were found
by the traveling outfit which had been missed entirely by the regular
nurses. After the truck had visited a given section the nurses in
charge of the district dispensary were instructed to make a note of
attendance. Records showed a considerable increase in visitors, a
number of whom brought with them the cards received at the traveling
dispensary or they said that they had been referred to the dispensary
after a preliminary examination on the truck.


MOTOR TRUCK CLINICS IN ITALY

In Italy seven trucks were used with practically the same equipment
as in Cleveland, and three more were equipped for dental work. They
were operated from certain centers in the region where the American
Red Cross Tuberculosis Commission worked in co-operation with Italian
tuberculosis organizations. From these centers the trucks radiated
on one-day trips to neighboring villages and towns carrying posters,
printed matter, and a crew consisting of an Italian physician,
lecturer, nurse, and driver.


A GOVERNMENT CHILD WELFARE SPECIAL

A big, gray automobile truck, known as the “Child Welfare Special,”
has recently been put into the field by the Children’s Bureau of
the United States Department of Labor to test the usefulness of
the automobile in carrying the message of better babies into rural
communities.

[Illustration: TRAVELING DISPENSARIES

Dispensaries of the Tuberculosis Commission of the American Red Cross
in Italy in the Court Yard of the Ducal Palace at Genoa. See pages 28
and 30.]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF CHILD WELFARE SPECIAL OF THE FEDERAL
CHILDREN’S BUREAU

For detailed description see page 31.]

The Children’s Bureau has provided the following description of the
truck and its tour:

 The truck is modeled very closely upon the dispensary truck used by
 the Chicago Tuberculosis Institute. The body of the car is constructed
 of wood, painted white on the inside and battleship gray on the
 outside. The words, “Child Welfare Special” are lettered in blue
 and white on each side of the car. The truck is roomy enough for a
 conference room and two dressing rooms. The conference room is nine
 and a half feet long, six feet wide, and six feet four inches high in
 the center. This room has four windows on each side, high enough to
 be out of reach of prying eyes, yet admitting sufficient light for
 daytime examinations. The driver’s cab, which is entirely enclosed in
 glass, can be reached from the conference room by a sliding door; with
 the shades drawn it forms one dressing room. The open-end gates of the
 car, provided with double folding doors and heavy curtains that fit
 into grooves, form a second dressing room. When a mother enters one of
 the rooms, she has the exclusive use of it until the child has been
 undressed, examined, and dressed again.

 Most of the equipment of the truck is built in. A 15-gallon water
 tank, tucked away over the driver’s cab, is connected by faucet with
 a stationary washstand in the conference room, which in turn is
 connected with a drain to the outside. The examining table and the
 linen lockers are built over the wheel housing, an arrangement that
 saves space and improves the appearance of the car. A scale for babies
 and older children is carried in an especially built trunk. There is
 enough storage space for 2,000 publications, a full set of exhibit
 material, a balopticon with several boxes of slides, two rolls of
 moving picture film, several dozen charts for lecture purposes, cot,
 bedding, and cooking utensils for three persons, a large supply of
 sheets and muslin squares, and all the other equipment necessary for
 conducting a children’s health conference.

 Two systems of lighting, one for a 110-volt current that can be taken
 from a nearby public building, and the other for a six-volt current
 taken from the truck’s own batteries, furnish excellent illumination
 for night work. Two electric heaters have recently been installed for
 use on cool days. Weather strips have been put on the cab to keep out
 wind and rain, and a tarpaulin made to fit over the rear doors keeps
 out the dust.

 Arrangements have been made for the staff to sleep on the Special--the
 doctor on an army cot in the conference room, the nurse on a similar
 cot in the rear dressing room, and the chauffeur on the driver’s seat,
 which was constructed to serve as a bed.

 A nearby public room in a school or church is usually obtained for an
 exhibit and waiting room, and here, at opportune moments, the doctor
 and nurse give brief talks to waiting mothers, using the exhibit
 material as a means of illustration.

 The first test of the efficiency of the Special is whether it serves
 its purpose. In the main the Special has proved a success from a
 mechanical point of view. The dressing rooms are adequate, and the
 conference room has proved itself remarkably convenient in spite of
 its small space. There are features that would be changed, however, if
 another truck were to be built. A more powerful engine is desirable.
 In spite of efforts to keep its weight down, the car when completely
 loaded tips the scale at 8,000 pounds. It does not seem advisable to
 reduce materially this weight as the body must be made to withstand
 the jar of travel and uncertain weather. The thirty-five horse power
 engine, supplemented by the extra pulling power provided by pneumatic
 tires, is adequate for most road conditions, but sandy, steep hills
 are negotiated with some difficulty. A heavier engine, one and a half
 or two-ton unit, would easily care for this load and at the same
 time carry enough reserve for any bad spots that are encountered.
 Mechanical adjustments made recently, however, have given greater
 power.

 Because of its size the Special does not travel well over muddy roads.
 The height of the car could be reduced by five or six inches and still
 permit easy walking within the car. This would very considerably
 reduce the sway and the danger of skidding.

A report from the physician in charge of the Special says:

 The Special has the distinct advantage of at once gripping public
 interest. This may seem spectacular from the professional standpoint,
 but it gets results. It is believed that the ground can be covered
 better by the Special than in any other way, that its improved
 equipment will make for more satisfactory results than any method
 tried to date, and that its usefulness is directly in proportion to
 the ability of the physician in charge to make the public realize
 that she is merely demonstrating the need of periodic examinations and
 a method of providing opportunity for such examinations. She must bear
 in mind that the examinations she gives are merely an incident and
 not the object of the Special--that her most important function is to
 stimulate and aid in the organization of permanent follow-up work by
 the community.

SPEAKING TOURS BY AUTOMOBILE OR MOTORCYCLE

One of the simplest and frequently a very effective form of traveling
campaign is the speaking tour of which examples are numerous
and familiar. Suffrage, prohibition, and many other causes have
been promoted by traveling speakers in conspicuously painted or
decorated automobiles. The speakers may carry with them all sorts of
attention-getting devices, from a supply of leaflets to distribute, to
a set of properties that would rival the stock of the old-time patent
medicine man.


A MOTORCYCLE KNIGHT OF HEALTH

The following picturesque description of “A Modern Knight Errant,
Carrying Health Gospel at Fifty Miles an Hour on A Motor Cycle,” is
taken from an article by Samuel Hopkins Adams, about the work of the
Wisconsin Anti-Tuberculosis Association[6]:


_The “Flying Squadron of Health”_

Seven o’clock of a June evening in the lake country to the north.
Supper is over. The mail has come jolting down by stage from
the nearest railroad point, fourteen miles distant, and has been
distributed from the post office which is also the general store and
the council-house of the locality. The population, gathered in from a
considerable radius, is talking a little politics, chewing a little
tobacco, speculating a bit on the likelihood of rain, and yawning
itself into readiness for home and bed. Far up the dusty road there is
an approaching commotion, perceptible both to ear and eye. Presently
the center of it materializes in the form of a motorcycle bearing a
man and a pack. The cycle pop-pops itself into a stationary phase. The
man dismounts, gives a pleasant “good evening” to the gossiping group,
appraises the immediate lay of the land with a practiced eye, unstraps
a pack or two, and in an incredibly short time has a light silk tent up
in a chosen spot by the road-way, a cooking kit laid out, a Dutch oven
set, and the “makings” of a fire gathered near it.

Now, here is romance for the young of the hamlet, Gypsying a la mode!
Knight-errantry at fifty miles an hour! The news runs amuck in the
locality and in no time there is a growing gathering. Questions begin
to fly; to each the newcomer has his brief but courteous answer, all
the time busy with his preparations for spending the night in the open.
Presently he unfolds carefully a case containing placards, setting them
up one by one against the stone fence. Conjecture, by this time, is at
the point of explosion.

“What are you sellin’, Mister?” comes the direct question.

“Nothing,” answers the stranger, setting up still another placard, and
stepping back to estimate the effect.

“Got a show?”

“Why, yes! in a way.”

“Givin’ out samples?”

“Not exactly.”

“Patent medicine feller, I guess,” surmises one. “Seen a couple of
’em over to Humphrey’s last fall.” “Naw,” controverts another, “He’s
sellin’ pictures, can’t ye see?” “Ain’t goin’ to preach, be ye, young
man?” queries a third.

“That too, in a way,” says the motorist.

Curiosity is now at its height. The crowd couldn’t be driven away by
a thunder shower. The newcomer has nursed the situation until he has
an absorbed attentiveness when he addresses the people in direct and
simple words, explains why he is there, and talks to them about the
peril of consumption and the ready-to-hand methods of guarding against
it, using the charts which he has set up to fortify his telling points.
It is done with a very conversational, homely and personal touch, so
that the audience is encouraged to ask questions about the individual
symptoms, the danger of “catching” the disease, the chances of cure
for this or that friend, what hospital will take old Mrs. Tinkley,
bedridden now for six weeks, and so on through the roster of health
and sickness topics which make up so large a part of the immediate
interests of countryfolk.

When the talk is over the visitor asks for the telephone, calls up a
town perhaps fifty or sixty miles away, and those who are near enough
to cock an ear hopefully (which includes as many as can crowd into the
store) hear something like this:

“Siddallville? Hello! That you, Mr. Conway? Yes. Werle.... I’ll be
there to-morrow night to speak.... No; I’ve got everything....
What’s that? No; no cost. All you have to provide is the hall and
the audience. I’ll furnish the rest.... Yes; seven-thirty to-morrow.
Good-bye!”

In the morning all that remains at the cross-roads to tell of the
visitation is a little heap of ashes, some queer marks in the dust
where the heavy-studded tires have passed--and a germinating seed of
education. The gospel has come to Shucktown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wisconsin has since tried something believed to be even better than the
“modern knight.” Finding that the motion pictures were a much greater
attraction than stereopticon slides, and having a four-reel health
film to show, the Wisconsin Anti-Tuberculosis Association gave up its
motorcycle and substituted a motion picture truck which is better
fitted to transport the necessary machinery for its traveling campaign
work.


CARRYING THE CANNING KITCHEN TO THE FOOD SUPPLY

An ingenious use of a truck as a first aid to canners is illustrated in
the photograph opposite page 38. This canning truck, chiefly intended
for service to those coming to see it, but also carrying its message
of war service to many neighborhoods, was sent out by the Women’s
Committee on Food Conservation of the Pittsburgh Food Administration.
The purpose of the truck is well described in a dodger, as follows:


LET US HELP YOU

=How=--With our canning truck.

=When=--At any time you can use us.

=Where=--At your own home or any other convenient place for you.

=Why=--To save home products for home use and leave for the Government
the output from commercial canneries for our soldiers. It is a sin
today to waste surplus vegetables if they can be canned.

=We Furnish=--Canning equipment, a teacher, and five or six helpers,
who carry their lunches with them to avoid extra work for you. They
work from 9 to 4 o’clock.

=You Furnish=--Stove room, a wash boiler, the vegetables or fruits to
be canned, and the jars.

[Illustration: CANNING SQUAD AND PORTABLE KITCHEN

 Canning squad of the Allegheny County Council of National Defense, and
 their portable kitchen ready to help the farmers’ wives save their
 food products. See page 37.]

=Cost=--It will cost you no money, but we will expect some fresh
vegetables or one-fifth of the jars canned during the day. We furnish
the jars for this share, which will later be used for some patriotic
purpose.

The director of this enterprise reported that it was not unusual for
the “crew” to can 80 or 100 quarts of vegetables or fruits in a day and
that they were kept busy every day for six weeks.

[Illustration:

                    _“United States Official” Photo_

A TRANSCONTINENTAL TRUCK TOUR

Transcontinental train of the Motor Transport Corps, U. S. War
Department. See page 39.]


“CARAVANS” OF TRUCKS

Since the war, much publicity has been obtained for the motor truck
itself by what have been called motor truck development tours. Several
such tours, each covering a number of states, have demonstrated to
farming communities the use of the farm tractor, the advantages of the
truck in carrying farm products to market, and various other uses of
motor vehicles.

A spectacular transcontinental tour of a train of eighty motor vehicles
was made during the summer of 1919 by the Motor Transport Corps of the
War Department. The caravan, which spread out over three miles of road
when in motion, included field kitchens, ambulances, repair trucks, and
in fact every sort of motor vehicle used by the transport service in
France. This trip was undertaken for both recruiting and educational
purposes. The following account of its purposes and methods is supplied
by a representative of the Motor Transport Corps:

The transcontinental trip has been undertaken both for military and
educational purposes, as follows:

 (1) An extended service test of the standardized principal types of
 army motors.

 (2) The War Department’s contribution to the Good Roads movement for
 the purpose of developing through-route and transcontinental highways
 as military and economic assets.

 (3) A demonstration of the practicability of long-distance motor post
 and commercial transportation.

 (4) The collection of detailed data for use in connection with the
 technical training of the commissioned and enlisted personnel of the
 Motor Transport Corps.

 (5) The procurement of recruits for the Motor Transport Corps.

 (6) Studies in terrain observation for certain branches of the army,
 particularly the Field Artillery, Air Service and Engineer Corps.

 (7) An exhibition to the general public, either through actual contact
 or resulting channels of publicity, of the development of the motor
 vehicle for military purposes.

The Lincoln Highway Association has co-operated with the Motor
Transport Corps in advertising the passage of the train along the
Lincoln Way, and through its subsidiary organizations it took a
large part in making advance arrangements for the welcome to and the
entertainment of the personnel of the convoy.

In addition, all the usual channels of publicity were employed in
advertising the trip of the convoy, and an officer acting as advance
publicity agent, preceded the train one or more days in order to
give notice of its approach and to make final arrangements for its
entertainment. A personal letter was written to the governor of each
state and to the chief official of each town, village and city and to
heads of civil and commercial organizations along the route, requesting
their co-operation in making the trip a success. A recruiting officer
with proper equipment accompanied the train and often went ahead to
placard towns and arrange for meetings at which Motor Transport moving
pictures were shown and the newly planned system of vocational training
to be given in the Motor Transport Corps schools was explained. All the
cargo trucks in the train carried signs describing the various phases
of the Motor Transport Corps activities. The Associated Press and the
Knights of Columbus had representatives with the train and there were
also several freelance writers representing newspaper syndicates. All
the war activity organizations, especially the War Camp Community
Service, were advised of the passage of the train and did everything
possible to make the men comfortable and to entertain them. As a
result of all this publicity the passage of the train was marked by a
continual succession of hearty greetings and hospitable entertainments.
Each community, large or small, passed through did something to show
its appreciation of the visit and its interest in the purposes of
the trip. In many instances the entertainment program and street
decorations were most elaborate.


FOOTNOTES:

[4] Not all of the touring campaigners have considered it an
advantage to carry camping outfits. Some of them say that the work
is so strenuous that they should have good beds at night and no
responsibility for providing for their own comfort. On the other hand,
in some districts camping may provide more comforts than rural hotels
would.

[5] After making a study of the Cleveland trucks sent to Italy, the
Chicago Tuberculosis Institute designed a lighter machine similar to
that described on page 31.

[6] Health to Sell, Samuel Hopkins Adams, La Follette’s Magazine,
December, 1914.




                                   V

                  ADVANCE PUBLICITY AND ORGANIZATION


IMPORTANCE OF GOOD ADVANCE WORK

The methods used in preparing the communities to receive the train are
as important a feature of the project as the visit of the train itself.
On the effectiveness with which the advance work is done depends its
opportunity to reach as many people as can be accommodated and to have
the audiences made up of the most hopeful “prospects,” those most
likely to act on the suggestions offered. Advance information that
arouses interest will bring visitors to the train in a receptive frame
of mind that makes it easier to present the message quickly.

One or all of the following kinds of advance work will need to be done
in each place to be visited, according to the nature and scope of the
campaign:

 1. General publicity and advertising.

 2. Specialized appeals directed to selected groups and individuals.

 3. Arrangements for distributing attendance over the full period of
 the visit.

 4. Arrangements for local co-operation in the above work, in taking
 care of visitors to the train, and in organizing or carrying out
 follow-up work later.

For convenience, the discussion of these matters is given in terms of
trains, although most of it applies equally to motor tours as well.


GENERAL ADVERTISING

The appeal to the general public in a community may be made through
news items in the papers, posters, window cards, window displays,
advertisements and inserts in advertisements, and slides in motion
picture theaters. Of the wide variety of methods to advertise an event,
these are probably the ones best adapted to advance preparation for
both large and small cities and towns. It is not the purpose here to
discuss the technique of preparing any of this material. Unless they
have ability and training in this field, those responsible for getting
work out should call in specialists to do it, or at least to advise
about it.

The purpose of advertising is more than merely to get a crowd. If there
is very little competition from other events, as is often the case in
small towns, it may be fairly easy to secure a large attendance. It is
the business of your advertising to attract the attention of persons
not yet interested in the subject matter and to arouse intelligent
interest in what the train or truck will show. To design posters and
prepare copy that will bring these results requires skill and practise
which may sometimes be obtained as a gift but is worth paying for.


SPECIALIZED APPEAL

The special groups to whom your message is chiefly directed may be
singled out from the general public and definite methods used to
insure their attendance. While most of the trains are of general
interest to the communities visited, the message of the exhibits or
demonstrations is probably addressed primarily to one or a few groups,
classified according to occupation, standing in the community, race,
age, condition of health, or particular interests. Special efforts to
reach these groups may take the form of letters, announcements, or
brief talks addressed to schools, churches, clubs, lodges, or employes
of factories and places of business. Committees on co-operation may
be formed within the groups and delegations appointed to come to the
train. A personal canvass may be made by letters, postcards, personal
visits, or telephone messages to leaders of groups or members of
special bodies.


ARRANGEMENTS FOR DISTRIBUTING THE ATTENDANCE

The tendency of the majority of the people is to select the same period
in the day as the most convenient or desirable time for coming to
the train. When the program is to be repeated a number of times, it
is necessary to plan special methods for distributing the attendance
over the less popular hours. This may be done as a feature of the
advance appeal to particular groups by setting aside periods for school
children, calling conferences of small bodies of people, assigning
hours when delegations will be received and personally conducted, or
having program features of interest to particular groups at stated
hours.

[Illustration:

                                ROBBERS
                                AT LARGE

          Peach Growers of East Texas are Being Robbed by the
                Insects and Diseases that attack Peaches

                     SPECIALISTS WITH EXHIBIT CARS

                                 COMING
                               ----TO----

                            _Winfield Texas
                          Thursday Nov. 20ᵗʰ_

 Most complete Orcharding Exhibit Train ever carried to the farmers of
                              the South.
    Will exhibit and demonstrate all phases of peach orchard work.


               Three Carloads of Equipment and Exhibits

Carload of power and hand sprayers, a tractor and other modern orchard
                              equipment.

Two exhibit cars electrically lighted and equipped to show by pictures,
lifelike models, specimens and slides of all the dangerous diseases and
                   insects known to Texas orchards.

    Actual field demonstrations on planting, pruning, spraying and
        cultivation will be conducted in an orchard near town.


                        FREE--EVERYBODY INVITED


                 UNITED STATES RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
                ST. LOUIS SOUTHWESTERN RAILROAD OF TEXAS
                           Co-operating with
          THE EXTENSION DIVISION OF THE TEXAS A. & M. COLLEGE.
           UNITED STATES AND STATE DEPARTMENTS OF AGRICULTURE

   For Further Information, See Your County Farm Demonstration Agent

POSTER ADVERTISING THE COMING OF AN EXHIBIT TRAIN

 This is the type of poster that is frequently sent out in advance of
 agricultural trains. The posters are usually on white paper or card
 with black letters. The news value of the material on the poster
 doubtless secures readers who would not be inclined to give attention
 to so much reading matter if it conveyed only educational information.]


ARRANGEMENTS FOR LOCAL CO-OPERATION IN MANAGEMENT

The co-operation of a local committee is needed in advertising and
running the show. The extent of this co-operation will depend upon the
size of the staff in charge of the train, size of the community, and
the nature of the program. The duties of local committees as described
in reports of various campaigns include:

 1. Co-operation in advertising the coming of the train.

 2. Making or checking up arrangements for the proper placing of the
 train.

 3. Arranging for a reception committee and helpers, as described in
 the section on attendance (pages 55 and 98).

 4. Securing such additional equipment as is called for by the program,
 such as a meeting hall, motion picture or stereopticon machine.

 5. Arranging such entertainment as may be needed by the train staff
 in the way of living quarters or meals, or both. The importance of
 providing for the comfort of the speakers and explainers who work
 under a severe strain can hardly be overestimated.


GETTING THE ADVANCE WORK DONE

The advance work is usually carried out by correspondence with a local
committee or individuals, or by sending an advance agent to make the
arrangements. Many tours of trains have been carried on without an
advance representative, in some cases because the expenses seemed
prohibitive or because of the difficulty in securing a suitable person
for this work. When well-organized local groups in communities to be
visited are already interested in the aims of the tour, it may be
comparatively simple to handle the advance work through correspondence.
But usually it is far more desirable to send an advance representative.

Arranging for local co-operation by correspondence is a slower method
than working through a personal representative. The headquarters staff
also have a more difficult task in preparing publicity material and
letters that will arouse the same enthusiasm that the agent can instil
through his direct contact with editors and other community leaders.

An example of the use of letters in place of an advance agent is
the following which was sent to health officers as one of a series
addressed to leading citizens by the West Virginia Public Health
Council:

 My dear Dr. ----:

 The “Health Car” now touring the state under the auspices of the
 West Virginia State Department of Health, in the interest of health
 education and child welfare, will arrive in your city at 8.30 o’clock
 on Saturday P.M. and will remain till 1.20 P.M. o’clock on Tuesday.

 The car is a vestibuled railway coach entirely remodeled and contains
 a chemical and bacteriological laboratory, a health exhibit of posters
 and electrically driven models and a picture machine. These, with the
 explanation given by a Health Instructor on the car, serve to impress
 on the minds of the people the principles of the promotion of health
 and prevention of disease.

 May we count on you to secure the interest and co-operation of the
 medical, dental and nursing professions in your community, for
 a public meeting at an hour which you, in consultation with the
 Superintendent of Schools and a president of an influential woman’s
 organization, may decide? We are also very desirous of securing the
 attendance of the Mayor and Town Council and any other citizens who
 do, or should, feel responsibility for community welfare and the
 conservation of child life. We have also written the Superintendent of
 Schools and your newspapers, realizing that the medical profession,
 the educational people and the press are the agencies our Government
 is counting upon for co-operation in constructive, peace-time work.

 The Health Car Corps will communicate with you immediately upon
 arrival in your city to learn of your plans for the utilization of
 their time and effort while with you. We are anxious to make their
 stay in each community count for the highest possible things in the
 interest of the public health and welfare.

 The car is supplied with a number of good Health Films which we will
 be glad to show, free of charge, to the public if arrangements can be
 made with some one who has a full-sized picture machine and a hall at
 his disposal.

                                            Sincerely yours,
                                            S. L. JEPSON, M.D.
                                            _State Health Commissioner_.

The following report from the director of the Texas Peach Demonstration
Train, described on page 13, is fairly typical of advance work done in
local communities without a personal representative:

 Articles announcing the tour of this train have been sent to all the
 large newspapers in the east Texas territory, also to the county
 newspapers. Individual letters have also been sent to the large peach
 growers, urging them to attend these meetings. In counties where
 there is a county demonstration agent, a great deal is being done to
 bring the matter to the attention of the farmers. Large posters have
 been put up a couple of weeks in advance of the train all through
 the different towns at which stops are to be made. The chambers of
 commerce and business organizations have been called upon several
 weeks in advance and furnished with full data, and they are doing all
 they can to make the meetings a success. The county judge in each
 county has given his co-operation by declaring the week in which the
 work is being conducted in his particular county as Horticultural Week.

 The chambers of commerce have, in many instances, made arrangements
 for special features in connection with the visit of our train.


QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ADVANCE AGENT

The personality and previous experience of the person needed to carry
out advance work form an important factor in the success of the whole
undertaking.

The agent should be able to work successfully with local committees,
since much valuable publicity will be secured through their efforts.
That is to say, he should be adaptable, clear, definite, and orderly
in his statements and in handling a meeting, and be able to inspire
enthusiastic interest in carrying out the plans he outlines.

His training and experience at best should include knowledge of
publicity or advertising methods, experience in working with volunteer
committees, and general information of the subject matter of the
campaign. Of these three, given an alert and intelligent worker who
has a moderate amount of what may be called “publicity sense,” an
understanding of how to organize volunteer workers is probably the
most necessary element in his or her equipment. For he may acquire
in a comparatively short time a working knowledge of the subject,
and may call in outside assistance in preparing the news stories and
advertising plans that he carries with him. But every local committee
presents new and unexpected problems, and no amount of coaching can
provide what is gained by experience in adapting plans and methods to
the peculiarities of a local situation, winning over a local chairman
who has prejudices or skepticisms, or simplifying or expanding plans of
work to fit the resources of the town as the agent may estimate them in
the brief time that he remains.


THE JOB OF THE ADVANCE AGENT

The first advance work is done by the committee or individual who
directs the whole enterprise from some central point, notifying local
persons of the purpose and the date of the agent’s visit. If there
is already a local representative of the movement in the community,
arrangements may be made which will save the agent much time in seeing
the editor, minister, school superintendent, and others on his list
whose co-operation he must secure. If there is no local representative,
letters should be sent directly to the persons upon whom he expects to
call.

The agent’s visit should be timed long enough in advance of the coming
of the train to allow for carrying out the publicity plans, and near
enough so that there will be no chance for interest to wane in the
interval. A ten-day start has been found satisfactory, especially when
the way has been paved for his visit and publicity and advertising
materials are ready for use. If an agent travels in an automobile, he
is better able to adapt his time to local needs and still keep ahead
of the train, than if he is dependent upon railroad schedules.

The Child Welfare Special of the Children’s Bureau was preceded by an
advance agent and the method is described in the bureau’s report of the
tour as follows:

 The advance agent, who travels two weeks in advance of the car
 arranges the itinerary, attends to the publicity, and organizes local
 communities to take charge of the work. Her first step is to call
 together a county child welfare committee. With their aid an itinerary
 is mapped out, and then local committees are organized in the
 communities to be visited. So far as possible, the agents work through
 the local child welfare committees formed during Children’s Year.

 These committees are asked to provide a suitable location for the
 parking of the Special--a spot that is centrally located, well shaded,
 and near a public room that can be used both as an exhibit and waiting
 room. They are also asked to make a canvass of their districts before
 the Special arrives, so that everyone may understand the purpose of
 the conference. Each committee member has her field of work clearly
 defined. A number of women are asked to serve as hostesses during the
 conference, receiving mothers and babies, giving them numbers for
 examination, and explaining the exhibit material.

 The agent then distributes her cuts and other publicity material for
 the newspapers, printed instructions for the child welfare committee,
 copies of announcements that ministers are asked to make from
 their pulpits, and posters advertising the coming of the Special.
 She visits city and county officials, social agencies, editors,
 physicians, clergymen, farm advisers, county demonstrators, business
 men, and other representative citizens to explain the purpose of the
 visit of the car.

 As a result of this work of the advance agent, the staff finds
 everything is in readiness on the arrival of the Special.

The Land Clearing Special of Georgia, a recent enterprise of the
State College of Agriculture, was preceded by an advertising campaign
designed to make the Land Clearing Demonstration the big event of the
season in each stopping place. In addition to the usual methods of
newspaper publicity, posters, and letters, twenty automobiles carrying
signs announcing the demonstration, visited the rural districts for
a week preceding the event. Telephone owners were called up on the
telephone and invited, and arrangements were made to have factory
and train whistles blow when the demonstrations were about to start.
Information about this plan was widely spread.


ASSIGNMENTS OF ADVANCE WORK FOR LOCAL COMMITTEES

With time for only a day or part of a day’s stop in a town the advance
agent has little opportunity to explain fully to the co-operating
committee all the details of advance preparation expected of its
members. To meet this situation, the directors of the Pennsylvania
Food Conservation Train with the co-operation of the present writer
prepared and multigraphed a set of instructions for local committees.
The agent distributed copies of these instructions to the members of
the executive committee in each town during the meeting that was held
on the day of his visit. Not all of these directions were suited to
every community visited, and frequently suggestions from the local
committee were added or substituted. This set of assignments is quoted
in full below. The features of the assignments especially worth noting
are:

 1. That written instructions or suggestions in addition to the agent’s
 personal explanation leave less to chance in getting the plans carried
 out.

 2. That the directions are exceedingly simple and flexible.

 3. That each separate assignment was printed on a separate sheet so
 that it could be placed in the hands of the person who was to carry it
 out.


EXPLANATORY STATEMENT FOR LOCAL CO-OPERATING COMMITTEES REGARDING THE
PENNSYLVANIA FOOD CONSERVATION TRAIN

Food Conservation Train Coming to ... On ... Quota of Attendance ...

You know the old saying, “If you want to get a thing done, do it
yourself.”

But there is a new one that is much more appropriate in wartime when
we should all be working together to win: “If you want to get people
interested, give them something to do to help.”

There is something for everybody to do to make the Food Conservation
Train a success.

=Dividing the Work.= The following list of assignments should be
divided among as many dependable people as you can find. Try some new
people who have not had a chance to help before.

Each assignment is described on a separate sheet, a copy of which may
be given to the person taking the assignment. If necessary, one person
may take several assignments.

               =Assignments= =Name of committee chairman=

 1. Reception committee.

 2. Newspapers.

 3. Advertising.

 4. Attendance of special groups.

 5. Churches.

 6. Schools.

 7. Attendance of foreign born.

 8. Speaking.

 9. Personal canvass.

 10. Motor service.

 11. Miscellaneous.


RECEPTION COMMITTEE

A reception committee usually of from six to ten members should receive
the visitors at the train. It is desirable to have four members on
hand, usually from ten to twelve o’clock, and six members from two
to five o’clock to welcome delegations, distribute literature, give
information, and explain exhibits.

The committee will be given a list of expected delegations so that
their leaders may be known and introduced to the train staff.

The committee will find that the train offers an excellent opportunity
to tell visitors of local activities for food conservation and to
invite their co-operation.

It will be well to have the whole reception committee at the train a
few minutes before its first opening at ten o’clock so that they may
become familiar with exhibits and have time for a brief conference with
members of the staff.


COMMITTEE ON NEWSPAPERS

The advance agent will bring with him material for the local paper, to
which will be added the names of committee members and of persons who
are helping the committee.

Other material that should be of interest to the local papers includes:

 1. A list of special delegations from lodges, churches, business
 groups, and others that will visit the train.

 2. Accounts of talks given by Four Minute Men and others about the
 food train and food conservation.

 3. An account of the work that is being done for food conservation by
 the local committee.

=Editorials.= Editors may be glad to take advantage of the presence of
the train as an occasion for an editorial on some local aspect of the
food situation, as encouraging the use of home products, regarding the
food hoarders, and so forth.

=Out-of-Town Papers.= The newspapers in the territory adjacent to your
town will carry some news of its coming. In addition to news sent to
those editors from state headquarters they will be interested in your
local plans and the names of your workers.


ADVERTISING COMMITTEE

One of these assignments could be given to each of several members of a
committee. The more workers there are the more enthusiasm there will be.

=Posters.= There are probably several persons who would gladly make
posters announcing the train if they were asked. Give them the facts
and let them work out their own ideas. Have these posters shown in
store windows and in public buildings. See that all posters sent from
the Philadelphia office are placed where they will do the most good.

=Window Displays.= Invite merchants to have window displays on food
conservation and help them with ideas. The sheets issued by the Retail
Store Section of the Food Administration contain pictures of windows
that are easy to copy. Be sure that the window display contains an
announcement of the food train.

Ask every merchant who has a sign writer or who makes his own window
cards to make up in his best style a card or sign announcing the coming
of the train.

=Slides in Moving Picture Theaters.= See that slides are displayed in
the moving picture theaters announcing the coming of the train. The
following makes a satisfactory slide:


                    SEE THE PICTURES AND WAR RELICS
                                  AND
                         LEARN WARTIME COOKERY

                        FOOD CONSERVATION TRAIN

                             _FREE_ _FREE_

                   12th St. SIDING, PENNSYLVANIA R.R.
                      10-12 A.M. 2-5 P.M. JULY 15

=Mention in Advertisements of Local Merchants.= Local food dealers,
especially those selling substitutes, should be interested in getting
their customers to see the exhibits and demonstrations. Ask them to
mention the train in their newspaper advertisements preceding its
arrival.

In addition to the usual advertising space of food dealers your
newspaper may be able to have a special page of food advertisements
with a large announcement of the train in the center.

Other advertisers may also be willing to mention the food train and may
find a way to work it into their advertisement as follows:

 On your way to the Food Conservation Train on Tuesday, don’t fail to
 drop in and see our new assortment of men’s neckwear, etc.


COMMITTEE ON SPECIAL DELEGATIONS

Since only a certain number of the people can see the train during
its brief stay and ALL the people should receive its message, it
is important that special delegations be arranged for, with the
understanding that the delegates will pass on the message brought by
the train to members of their organizations.

Morning attendance is lightest. As many as possible of these special
groups should be arranged for during the morning.

The director of the train and the chairman of the reception committee
should each receive a list of delegations that expect to attend, also
the hour when they will arrive.

If any special group promises to come at a given hour, have a committee
member meet them and introduce them at the train. People will be more
likely to come if they feel some special attention is being shown them.

The following groups are suggested; others may be added or substituted
as the committee may decide:

=Officials.= An official delegation made up of members of council
of defense, city officials, chamber of commerce, trades assembly,
Red Cross and other war agencies, newspaper editors, and others.
This delegation should be the first to come in the morning after the
reception committee arrives.

=Schools.= Special arrangements for the attendance of school children
in the morning are suggested on a separate assignment sheet, with the
heading “Schools.”

=Churches.= See the assignment on Co-operation of Churches for a
suggestion for having delegations from church societies.

=Restaurants and Hotels.= Managers and cooks of hotels and restaurants
should come in a body at a special hour so that information and answers
to questions of special interest to them can be arranged.

=Food Sellers.= There are exhibits of special interest to food sellers,
and these persons can be very helpful in passing on information to
their customers. All should be asked to attend in a body if possible.
Can you arrange for the stores to be closed at a certain hour?

=Employes.= Employers might be willing to excuse some of their workers
in stores and factories, especially if they are near the train, for a
brief visit. If a factory delegation can be arranged for at the noon
hour a special session may be arranged for them.

=Clubs.= All fraternal orders, civic, social clubs, and labor unions,
should be especially urged to be represented. The men’s organizations
will be especially interested in the war relics and in the maps showing
important facts about food distribution.


COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATION OF CHURCHES

The Food Conservation Train aims to teach the message of
brotherhood--of sharing our food with those whose need is greater than
ours. All the churches will be glad to help make it a success if you
tell them what to do.

=Announcements.= Ask ministers to have announcement of the train given
at all services during the week before it arrives. Announcement forms
are supplied.

=Delegations.= Invite church societies to send delegations to the
train. Be sure that the women who plan church suppers, bazaars, and
food sales are appointed among delegates. They will receive valuable
suggestions.

It is important that men’s classes and societies send delegates.

=Sermons.= Ask ministers to preach sermons on the Sunday before the
train arrives on our obligation to feed the world from our generous
stores of food. They may obtain helpful information from (insert name
of a food administration bulletin giving general information about
the food situation), of which copies may be had from (name of local
official or committee).


COMMITTEE ON SCHOOLS

School children can be of great assistance in spreading the news of the
train.

=Invitations to Parents.= The teachers may be asked to have the
children write invitations to their parents to visit the train as an
exercise in composition.

=Attendance of School Children.= Groups of older school children
(attending high school) should come with their teachers in squads of
about thirty or forty at fifteen-minute intervals during the morning.
Domestic science classes should come in a body.

Drawing and manual training classes may be asked to study the exhibits
with a view to reproducing them at a later date for the benefit of
parents and friends.


COMMITTEE ON ATTENDANCE OF FOREIGN LANGUAGE GROUPS

Remember those who do not speak English. We particularly wish to reach
them. The following steps are necessary:

=The Leaders.= The committee should see and actively interest the
clergymen. If they approve, they can do much to interest the members of
their congregations.

In the same manner, interest the chief foreign business men. Find out
what leaders among them have been revealed by the Liberty Loan and
other campaigns, and reach them.

=Workers.= Let every employer having foreign workers and every woman
employing foreign domestics advertise to and through them.

Arrange special hours for groups by languages and be sure to have an
interpreter or a speaker in their own language.

=Be Democratic!= Above all else be democratic in your dealings with
these foreign-born workers. Make them feel that they are asked to take
a part in a common experience, not that the native born are “unloading”
something upon the foreigners. Keep yourselves in the attitude of being
willing to learn as well as to teach.


COMMITTEE ON SPEAKING

Use the Four Minute Men in advertising the train. Call upon others
who can speak. Tell them what the Pennsylvania Food Administration is
trying to do with the train and ask them to speak for you.

The director and staff of the train are willing to address noon
meetings with the object of urging attendance at the afternoon session.
Factory employes can be reached in this way. Arrange with the manager
of any local corporation, particularly one employing girls, to have
such a meeting.

Try to have a speaker at any gathering that is held during the week or
ten days before the train arrives.


PERSONAL CANVASS

=The Men.= If your men are not as eager to conserve as the women, get
them to come to the train and we can help you to interest them. The
exhibit car especially contains war relics, pictures, and maps of
interest to men. Invite as many men as you can reach personally or by
telephone.

=The Farmers’ Wives.= The best publicity to farmers’ wives is personal.
Let the committee take the telephone book, divide up the names of the
farmers, and see that each farm woman is ’phoned to at least three days
before our coming. Have letters sent to farmers’ wives several days
before train arrives. (Forms supplied.)

If you know of interested women who are lame, or otherwise shut in,
send someone for them in an automobile.

=Last Minute Calls.= Personal telephone calls on a day before the train
arrives are an indispensable means of insuring attendance. Get some of
the older high school girls to divide up the telephone directory among
them and call up the numbers systematically from their own homes. They
should simply announce that the Food Conservation Train is going to be
in town to-morrow and give the time and place where it may be found.
If the train has been generally advertised a large attendance can be
insured by this method. It reminds people.

=Motor Service.= In order to reach the people of outlying districts, it
is possible to organize a girls’ motor service. Have the automobiles
go to an advertised point where they will pick up all who desire to go
to the train. They can make several trips in morning and afternoon.
It would be well to have automobiles doing this work carry banners
advertising the train and its special work.




                                  VI

                        THE MESSAGE OF THE TOUR


The message of the campaign includes the ideas, facts, and plans to be
presented to the audiences. The choice of a topic or its scope, what
to say about it, and how much, are questions deserving more thoughtful
consideration and real work than is usually given to them. The most
important and the most difficult thing in preparing the message is
to have constantly in mind a picture of the way in which it is to be
delivered. If, for example, the project takes the form of an exhibit
and lecture train in which visitors will spend part of their time
listening to a talk and the remainder passing through several cars to
examine displays, we should, as we plan the message, try to picture
the train on the siding at, let us say, Jonesville. We should also
visualize the numbers and types of people likely to come, how they will
divide their time between the talks and the exhibits, how long they
will stay, or how long we will wish them to stay, what they know about
the subject already, and what they will want to know, what they could
do with this or that kind of information, and how much and what part of
the message they are likely to remember. If the campaign is carried
on with a truck and its program includes a demonstration which only a
few people can see, and a motion picture and lecture program for much
larger numbers, there are two problems; first, visualizing the small
groups for the demonstration, and second, the larger audience for the
more popular program.

Reports of topics and methods of presenting them that have come in from
many and varied traveling campaigns indicate that much more attention
could be given to this question of preparing the message, and that
frequently topics have been selected and the form of presentation
worked out with only a very hazy visualization of the conditions and
the people to be encountered at Jonesville and other points along the
route.


CHOICE OF A TOPIC

Experience leads most directors, sooner or later, to choose a single
topic that is definite and concrete, rather than a group of topics
or one that is broad in scope. This limiting of the topic is all the
more likely to be important where the subject of the campaign is
unfamiliar to the prospective audience. The titles given to many of
the agricultural trains indicate that their directors have found the
concrete and single topic satisfactory. Trains have been called the
“Stump Pulling Special,” “Wheat Special,” “Better Seed Car,” and “Dairy
Train.”

In the health field the topics have often been very general, as “Child
Welfare” or merely “Public Health.” One public health car, which seemed
to be fairly typical, carried exhibits on the prevention and cure of
tuberculosis, care of babies, the duties of the school nurse, food
adulteration, communicable diseases, playgrounds, venereal diseases,
and a description of the functions of the State Health Department. The
more inclusive and thus less specific the topic the more vague and
general will be the talk about it afterward by those who visited the
train.

A reason sometimes given for presenting varied and general topics is
that the purpose is not so much to give definite information which
will be remembered and acted on, as to impress people with the scope
and importance of the subject. For example, the visitors to a public
health car in which many phases of the subject are touched upon may
carry away a conviction that public health work is important to the
community and should be supported although their ideas of it were very
vague. This result may satisfy the purpose of some campaigns, but more
often directors who present a variety of topics hope that something
about each will be remembered; and there is reason for believing that
their hope will not come as near to realization, or at least that
the information will not be of as great utility, as it might if the
subjects were fewer and more specifically treated.

Another argument frequently brought forward in favor of including
several topics is that all sorts of people will visit the train or
truck, and while one will be interested in one subject others will be
more interested in something else. When those in charge of the program
are meeting only a few people at a time, they can talk separately to
each visitor about special problems, but the brief stops made on most
tours require the message to be presented to a large group at one
time or at least in quick succession, so that in practice it usually
happens that all the visitors see and hear the same things. In this
case the more closely a single and concrete topic is adhered to, the
more hopeful campaigners may be that what is said or displayed will be
remembered.

An equally important reason for limiting the number of topics is the
desirability of having your whole audience get the same message. In
connection with the Wheat Specials, for example, not alone should the
farmer and the farmer’s wife and the farmer’s children be informed
about the wheat problems of the locality, but the local banker and
business man stand in need of much the same information. The preacher
and the doctor will help to spread the doctrine, and the school teacher
can make good use of what he learns. The more nearly the entire
community, young and old, understands and is interested in the same
message, the more likely that the desired results will follow.

Occasionally two or three topics may be presented on the same train by
having separate cars for each topic and a separate audience for each.
Thus, on one train a car containing household labor-saving devices was
designed to interest the wives of farmers, and a pure-seed car the
farmers. Or several topics may be combined in such a way that they are
made parts of one large idea. Health topics might be brought together
under “The Health of the Family,” and divided into instruction about
the care of the baby, the child at school, the teaching of social
hygiene to older boys and girls, and the sanitation of the household.
But even when thus closely related to the family interests of the
visitors, this group of topics is still too varied to permit any one to
make a strong and lasting impression.


WHAT TO TELL

Having chosen a topic, there is sure to be so much to tell about it
that careful selection again becomes necessary. The best guide in
preparing the subject matter of the program is the visualization of
expected audiences already referred to. It cannot be too strongly
emphasized that the relation of the subject matter to their interests,
circumstances, and habits will largely determine their response to the
suggestions given. Often this relationship exists, but is not explained
clearly enough to be readily understood. The fact that the traveling
campaigners come from a distance, bringing new ideas expressed in an
unfamiliar way, leads an audience to look upon the whole project as
something which is no doubt very interesting to see and hear about, but
of no immediate concern to themselves. It is worth while to make a very
special effort to overcome this attitude of aloofness and to make the
audiences see that what you are bringing is something that they have
been wanting all the time, without their fully realizing it.

[Illustration: GROUP OF OBJECTS EXPRESSING ONE IDEA

A conspicuous title sign holds together a number of objects and
captions illustrating one idea. The exhibit gains greater unity and
separation from other exhibits by being enclosed on three sides.]


MAKING UP THE PROGRAM

The term program is used here to include the combined activities and
displays that make up what is presented to visitors at each stopping
point. It may consist of music, talks, demonstrations, motion pictures,
or displays of posters and objects, or several of these features
combined, with varying emphasis on one or the other form.

It may be held inside of railroad cars or in an open space, using for a
stage a flat car, the rear platform of a passenger car, or a temporary
structure. Or it may be given in a hall in the town. Sometimes the
program includes both indoor and outdoor features.

It is usually a good idea to arrange what might be called a “unit”
program that will include everything that it is desirable for a given
visitor or group of visitors to do, see, and hear in order to fully
understand and enjoy the message. This unit program has an important
place in the arrangement of itinerary, schedule, and the arrangements
made for the attendance. For example, if the unit program lasts an
hour we have a means of deciding the number of times it needs to be
repeated in order to reach the desired number of visitors. If it lasts
two or three hours we are likely to find that in our advance work we
will need to make a greater effort to attract a carefully selected
audience, since the longer the program in most cases the fewer the
people who could enjoy it even once. The suggestions below have to
do with some of the factors to take into account in selecting and
combining features of this unit program.

Features intended wholly or mainly as attractions, such as music, or
dramatic or comic films, should not be placed in competition with
educational features for getting attention or holding interest. They
may be said to compete when they distract attention from the main topic
or take up an undue share of the time of visitors, or are so much more
popular in form than the educational topics as to be more talked about
and remembered afterward.

The program should be arranged so that the one idea or set of facts
which it is the purpose of the tour to deliver holds the center of
the stage at all times, and so that it commands attention whether it
takes the form of a talk or exhibit, or both. As has already been said,
the main idea should not be overshadowed or lost sight of through the
rivalry of other attractions. Finally, so that there may be no doubt
that it is understood and remembered, the main idea should be repeated
in different forms, in talks, demonstrations, exhibits, and printed
matter.

If the visitor is obliged to stand during all or the greater part of
the time he is not likely to give more than an hour of interested
attention to talks and displays. Many will give much less. The actual
period that the average visitors will remain under certain conditions
is soon learned by experimenting, and each feature should be timed so
that a satisfactory presentation of the subject can be assured for the
majority of them.

However attractively the subject is presented through motion pictures
or other displays, a good talker is about the most important element
in getting the idea across to the visitors. Whether the speaker
accompanies his talk with slides or objects, conducts a demonstration,
explains exhibits, or makes running comments on motion pictures, his
ability to be heard, to hold interest, and to express himself simply,
briefly, and concretely will often be the chief factor in the success
of the program. Lecturers for traveling campaigns should be chosen
as much for their ability as speakers as for their knowledge of the
subject matter.


PROGRAMS OF EXHIBIT TRAINS

The following plan for a program was announced for one of the Liberty
Loan trains:

 Aerial bombs will be sent off as train reaches stop.

 Liberty Loan representatives in charge of train will make brief
 address and ask local committee of three to come onto the platform.

 Five-minute address by the local chairman or someone selected by him.

 Talk by returned soldier.

 Address by experienced speaker with principal object of urging
 necessity of subscribing to Loan.

 Invitation by Liberty Loan representative to inspect exhibition.

The trains for which this program was planned made short stops and the
talks were given from a platform or from one of the flat cars. A large
crowd could be reached by a single speaking program. In this case the
speaking was the important feature, and the exhibits of war material
were an “attraction” rather than an educational feature. It satisfied
the purpose of the tour to have most of the time devoted to speeches,
followed by a rapid view of exhibits.

The extension division of the Texas State College of Agriculture
reports the following program method:

 Immediately upon going into a town, the people were loaded into the
 lecture cars and three lecturers would alternate for a twenty-minute
 talk on different subjects in each car. Where outdoor meetings were
 held the exhibit cars were closed upon coming into town and general
 lectures were first had from the platform car, then the live stock
 were led onto the platform car where special demonstrations were
 given. As soon as this formal program was completed the specialists
 were stationed back through the exhibition cars and the crowds were
 allowed to enter the front of the train and pass gradually through the
 entire train, making such inquiries of the specialists as they cared
 to while going through the exhibition car.

Here again the speaking and the outdoor demonstrations are evidently
regarded as the important features. Such a plan should not be
considered if the exhibits are of real importance. The audience that
has been standing during the program of perhaps half an hour or more,
and has then waited in line to go through the train, is a tired
audience and not nearly so responsive as though its members came fresh
to the exhibits. It is also true that when the program is so arranged
that the whole crowd is ready at one time to start through the train,
there is much more difficulty in managing the people and much more
dissatisfaction on the part of those at the rear end of the line. It
is difficult to get careful attention for exhibits from people who
are being moved ahead to make way for an impatient crowd standing in
long lines behind them. The managers of trains will do well to decide
in advance whether the speaking or the exhibits constitute the really
important feature of the program. If it is the exhibits, then the
speaking should be made incidental, perhaps, by having a ten-minute
talk given from the platform at regular intervals as a new group is to
be started through the train.


A PROGRAM COMBINING DEMONSTRATIONS AND EXHIBITS

A method of dividing the time between demonstrations in two cars and
an exhibit car was worked out satisfactorily on the Pennsylvania
Food Conservation Train. All the audience passed through the train
in the same direction, starting at the same point, except that
at the beginning of the session all the cars were filled at once
to avoid delays. When the first car was filled a talk on canning
started. No attempt was made to demonstrate a complete process, but
different vegetables or fruits were in various stages of preparation
continuously, so that a fifteen-minute illustrated talk brought out the
points that required emphasis. After about five minutes of questions
and looking at displays of equipment and canned articles, this crowd
moved on to the next car, while the first car was filled again with the
next group of arrivals. In the second car a similar program was given
on uses of wheat substitutes. In the third car two explainers met the
audience and explained the exhibits found there. As the topics in all
three cars were closely related (the demonstrations showing how to save
food and the exhibits showing why food saving was necessary), an hour
spent in three cars gave variety enough to keep interest awake and
still kept closely to the one big idea--“Save Food.”

[Illustration: DEMONSTRATION CAR

A day coach used for a canning demonstration on the food conservation
train of the New York Central Railroad and the New York State College
of Agriculture.]

[Illustration: AN OUTDOOR PROGRAM

Crowd listening to a speech at the War Trophy Train which toured
Kentucky as a feature of the Fourth Liberty Loan campaign.]


OUTDOOR SPEAKING AT TRAINS

If speaking to a general audience is the important thing, a talk from
the outside of the train would seem better than crowding people into
the cars; but even outside speeches from the platform or a flat car, or
an especially built platform at the train present many difficulties.
The location of the train frequently does not provide good standing
room for the crowds; there is frequently distraction from the noise of
other trains and persistent rainy weather must be reckoned with also.
It is very important to have speakers with good outdoor voices, for the
effect on the audience of straining to hear a speaker is irritating and
leaves behind a bad impression.




                                  VII

                             EXHIBIT CARS


TYPES OF CARS

Practically every type of car from the Pullman to the flat car can be
fitted up to suit some exhibit or demonstration purpose. The Pullman,
with its broad windows and attractively finished woodwork, makes a more
pleasing setting for displays than the day coach. The day coach with
seats removed and shelves built in for the display of exhibits has been
the most generally used type of car. Photographs of the Pennsylvania
Food Conservation Train show day coaches with interiors fitted up
with counters, platforms, and cupboards with dimensions based on a
careful calculation of the desired use of every inch of floor and wall
space.[7] The baggage car is more nearly ready for use in an emergency
since it does not need to be dismantled, but it is neither so well
lighted nor so well finished as the coach. The flat car is well adapted
to a display of large and heavy equipment, or for demonstrations that,
require a platform to display them to an audience standing near the
track. On agricultural trains, demonstrations of milking or judging
live stock have been given on flat cars. On the Liberty Loan trains
flat cars were employed to show cannon, machine guns, tanks, and other
large equipment. In the photograph opposite page 80 a flat car is shown
fitted with a framework for a tarpaulin for protection against weather.
This is a necessary precaution in using flat cars.

An experienced director of exhibit trains writes: “An especially built
and designed car for the purpose is well worth its additional cost.
Such cars as I have seen provided by the railroads for temporary
service in exhibit lines have all been old, small, and often
broken-down baggage or passenger cars, in every way unsuitable for a
purpose where the most extreme dimensions available still leave the
exhibit and circulation space contracted. Cars should be built on the
largest frames and the most extreme dimensions that the railroads, as
governed by their tracks, bridges, and tunnels can handle. Windows
should be set high in the car walls, giving a high source of light and
maximum wall space for exhibits, and should be larger than those in the
ordinary coach to secure better ventilation. The doors should be built
wider than the usual car door.” The plan calls for small and compact
living and office quarters at one end. The director also adds that
the installation of an engine to furnish lights and power for working
models is an important item of equipment. One engine is sufficient
to run lights, fans, and models for several cars. In these days of
portable electrical outfits, this item is practicable and fairly
inexpensive.


TRAVELING ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STAFF MEMBERS

The kind of living arrangements provided for the lecturers and
assistants will depend, to some extent, upon the frequency of the stops
and the number of persons traveling with the train. Several of the more
elaborately equipped trains have carried a Pullman sleeping coach and a
diner for the staff members. If there are frequent stops, it would seem
that at least sleeping quarters on the train are necessary. Meals are
sometimes arranged for at stopping places, and in this case the advance
agent is responsible for seeing that good meals are assured. When stops
of a full day or more are made, the staff members sometimes find rooms
and meals in hotels en route. Whatever the arrangements, as is stated
elsewhere, they should insure the greatest possible degree of comfort
to the staff, in order to offset the severe strain that this kind of
campaigning inevitably involves.


TREATMENT OF CAR INTERIORS

The two chief difficulties with exhibits on trains are keeping them
clean and so securing them in place as to withstand the jarring motion.
Washable surfaces on floors, shelves, and walls are essential. Exhibits
should be either of the kind that are easily kept clean or else placed
under cover or frequently replaced. No decorations such as draped
bunting, which collects and holds dust, should be used. Clusters of
small flags hung straight from chandeliers are attractive and non-dust
collecting decorations. Small objects should be either securely
fastened to shelves or packed away while the train is in motion.

[Illustration: FLAT CARS USED FOR DISPLAYING CAPTURED GERMAN TROPHIES

 A section of a Liberty Loan War Relic Train. Canvas covers can be
 thrown over the framework to protect the exhibit from the rain. This
 framework also provides a support for arc lights, so that the exhibit
 can be displayed at night.]


EXHIBITS

Having selected the subject matter, you have a choice of presenting it
through exhibits, demonstrations, talks, or all three.

For still exhibits the use of models, objects, cartoons, posters,
transparencies for the windows, and brief slogans or statements on
placards have been found most suitable. As is brought out in a later
section under methods of display, the dimensions of a car place severe
limitations on the forms that may be used to advantage, and the same
principle applies to the selection of these as to the content of a
train exhibit.

Just as there should be few ideas so there should not be too many
sizes, shapes, and forms of exhibits which confuse the eye in the way
that variety of topics confuses the mind.

Because of the necessity of moving people through the cars rapidly
enough to make way for others to follow, it is essential that whatever
is displayed may be quickly seen and understood. This limitation rules
out many forms that might be shown satisfactorily in halls. Anything
that is expressed chiefly by words may better be left to speakers
and printed matter for distribution as there is not time to read
words and figures and, indeed, visitors have little inclination to
do so. Diagrams, particularly those presenting detailed facts, also
call for close examination and delay the progress of visitors. One
train exhibitor of experience says: “One of the greatest dangers to
be avoided is an excess of charts and small type. The exhibit should
be such that the crowds can be kept moving through the car and,
nevertheless, be able to seize the principal points intended to be
taught.”

A description of a part of a single health car in one report includes
“75 wall charts illustrating the cost in human lives of tuberculosis,
typhoid fever, and diarrhea. Each series of charts has grouped about
it from two to twelve models. Several hundred photographs show
occupational conditions favorable to tuberculosis.” Such a collection
as this is suited only to intensive study and not at all to a popular
traveling exhibit.

Methods used to attract attention to one thing should not distract
attention from other things. For example, in a certain health car
a bell struck every three minutes tolling the one hundred and
seventy-five thousand deaths annually from tuberculosis. This is a
striking and effective way of making people heed a startling fact, but
unfortunately every time the bell rang in so small a space as the car
it interfered with the study of other features being presented.

There is little opportunity to get attention for detailed or complex
displays, no matter how attractive and interesting they may be. The
following is taken from a description of a mechanical device shown on a
train through which visitors were always moving rapidly because there
was a long waiting line: “A model block-signal system about 25 feet in
length, illustrating the protection provided by a clock-signal system
was in full operation. This model had two sidings and was designed
particularly to show single-track operation. Intermediate signals were
shown between the clock signals by means of lights.” The information
that this model conveyed illustrates very well the kind that is too
complicated to be understood without a careful examination and some
explanation by an attendant.

You must, therefore, in planning the form as in planning the content of
your exhibit, keep your eye steadily on the picture of the Smiths and
Browns at the train as it stands on the side track in Jonesville with
many people moving through the cars. You can test the practicability
of your devices and other displays by asking yourself these questions
concerning the probable reaction of Brown and Smith:

Will it attract their attention?

Will it arouse their interest?

Will they remember it?

Will it bring a response from them?

These are generally recognized aims of advertising, and they apply
equally to exhibits which are, after all, a form of advertising.


USE OF THE SPACE FOR DISPLAY

For displaying exhibits to moving audiences, the use of the space
should be so planned that it is easy to keep visitors moving in a given
direction and at the same time make it possible for them to grasp
quickly the meaning of what they see.

The majority of those who have reported on their experience with trains
agree that it is very important that visitors should move in a single
direction. This is beyond question desirable unless small audiences are
expected; but as is stated elsewhere, capacity audiences are the aim of
most enterprises.

Having agreed on a one-way movement, there is, however, still
considerable disagreement as to the best arrangement of
material--whether on two sides of the center aisle, or along the center
of the car with an aisle on either side, or finally, with exhibits
displayed on one side only with a single aisle.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF HEALTH EXHIBIT CAR

 An example of the display of exhibits on both sides of a center aisle.
 If there are many visitors going through the car at one time, they
 must move slowly along the narrow aisle, looking alternately at an
 exhibit on one topic on the right, and one on another topic on the
 left. Both physically and mentally this method of viewing exhibits is
 likely to be tiring. One would expect the average visitor to carry
 away a confused impression of the facts and ideas presented.]

[Illustration: A WELL ARRANGED EXHIBIT CAR]

[Illustration: A WELL ARRANGED EXHIBIT CAR

 A car interior on the Pennsylvania Food Conservation Train designed to
 overcome as many as possible of the difficulties in train exhibiting.

 The curved space, too high to attract attention easily, is used for a
 symbolic frieze in colors, the design, in three parts, being repeated
 five times and running the length of the car. The same space was used
 less successfully, as shown in the cut opposite page 70, for reading
 matter which was read only when the explainer called attention to it.
 The framed captions and the pictures below them are approximately
 at eye-level. Variety combined with a symmetrical arrangement is
 obtained by placing a large poster over every fourth window, while the
 transparencies on the remaining windows allow plenty of light to enter.

 Exhibits are displayed on one side of the car only. An economical use
 of the 9-foot width of the car is obtained as follows:

 Raised platform for the explainer, 20 inches wide.

 Counter, 28 inches wide.

 Aisle for visitors, 4.5 feet wide.

 The use of vertical space is also carefully planned and is roughly:

 Counter height, 40 inches.

 Upright board at back of counter, 11 inches high.

 Combined height of pictures and captions, 36 inches, with lower edge
 about 48 inches from the floor.]

The first method, that of displaying exhibits on two sides of the
center aisle, makes the progress of the visitor very slow and awkward,
for he must continually turn from one side to the other as he goes
unless, of course, he violates the rule of moving in one direction
only and in so doing comes back along the same aisle. Not only is it
awkward to turn continually from side to side in viewing exhibits
but it is difficult to arrange material so that the visitor can in this
way follow an idea logically. His attention is alternately given to
the topics on one side and the other, unless by some elaborate system
of arrangement the story moves from one side to the other. Another
difficulty is that the explainer has no place to stand except in the
aisle, holding back the visitors. The very narrow middle aisle left
by counters or tables on two sides is still another disadvantage.
Moreover, favored with space at the expense of visitors, the exhibits
are less likely to be seen and their value is thus lowered.

Displays along the center of the car with an aisle on each side might
be satisfactory in some cases, especially if all the material is in
the form of models or objects and there is no need to use the walls.
This method allows for the movement of visitors in single file down one
aisle and back the other, or for two parallel lines to move in a single
direction on both sides of the display. Some who have tried this method
found that visitors did not look at the walls but gave their whole
attention to the center of the car.

[Illustration: FOOD CONSERVATION TRAIN OF NEW YORK STATE COLLEGE OF
AGRICULTURE

Exhibits in the center of the car with a narrow aisle on each side. See
page 86. The objects on the floor obstructing the aisle were probably
placed in the aisle only for photographing.

Jars of fruits and vegetables are attractively displayed at the
right height, and with light shining through to bring out color
and clearness. There is a welcome lack of crowding, and desirable
simplicity in the car as a whole.]

The third method, that of placing exhibits on one side only, seems
to have been found the most satisfactory. In this way both wall and
floor space on one side may be used to their full advantage, while the
visitors looking in a single direction move fairly rapidly. A space may
be left for the explainer between the wall and the counter, as shown
in the picture opposite page 85. Also, she may move the length of the
car and back without difficulty, having the counter between her and
visitors.

[Illustration: ARRANGEMENT OF RAILROAD CAR INTERIOR

 Simple and attractive arrangement of exhibits on the Wisconsin Pure
 Seed and Home Power Special. The exhibitors showed unusually good
 judgment in their use of wall space. The information given is brief,
 to the point, easily read, and well displayed. The disadvantages of
 displaying the exhibits on both sides of the narrow center aisle,
 discussed on page 84, are illustrated here.]


PLACING EXHIBITS

The first consideration in placing exhibits is that they shall be at
the right height. The best space on walls is that on a level with the
eye. The eye will travel up and down in following a display that has
caught the visitor’s attention, but isolated placards, pictures, or
objects placed too high or too low to be within easy range have small
chance of being observed.

The wall spaces of a car are considerably broken, as may be observed in
the photographs. The curved space is excellent for decoration or for
brief slogans, but should not be depended upon for anything requiring
detailed examination. The upper part of the window space is usually
most nearly at eye level, but windows are needed for light and it is
wise not to cover with displays that shut out the light more than a
half or a third of those on one side and none at all on the other.
One needs to reckon with the possibility of trains often being placed
close to the exhibit cars, or the cars being placed beside buildings
that cut off the light entirely on one side. Probably the best use of
windows is for cartoons or posters made on transparent paper or cloth,
or on the familiar glass transparencies. The space below the windows
is too low for wall displays. The illustration of the Pennsylvania
Food Conservation Train opposite page 85 shows a good use of windows
and wall space. Another photograph opposite page 87 also shows an
interesting use of space.

The counters, shelves, or tables should be so built as to bring the
objects on them as nearly as possible on a level with the eye, at the
same time without cutting off the view of wall exhibits. The height
and dimensions of the counters shown opposite page 85 were worked out
carefully to meet this condition.

It is always a good thing to have a railing separate visitors from the
exhibits as more people can see them if all are held back from pressing
too closely.

Another important consideration in placing exhibits is that they should
not be crowded. When objects or placards crowd one another it becomes
impossible to look at one thing without having others in the margin of
vision interfere with concentrated attention. The first impression of
a crowded car is one of bewilderment. The visitor is obliged not only
to grasp new ideas and facts presented in an unfamiliar form, but to
select among a large number those of special interest to him.


ARRANGEMENT OF SUBJECT MATTER

Because of the small space and necessarily quick movements of visitors,
it is especially important that exhibits should be arranged in some
logical sequence. Visitors are sometimes called upon to perform amazing
feats in mental acrobatics, leaping from one topic to another with
breathless speed. For example, in the exhibit pictured opposite page
84, we see a poster about baby deaths resting on a model of a school
building with a placard nearby urging the use of schools as community
centers. Across the narrow aisle is a model obviously unrelated either
to community centers or baby deaths. The sequence of ideas should
be such that each new thought is made easier to understand and more
interesting because of what went before it, or each separate exhibit
should be clearly related to one central idea. Thus, in the first
exhibit of the Pennsylvania Food Conservation Train the series of
topics was developed as follows:

    Why we must save
    Small savings
    Saving wheat
    Saving sugar
    Saving fats
    Using all the milk
    Using home products.

Not only the sequence of ideas but the separation between two topics
is important. This can be accomplished by a visible separation,
allowing a distance of at least six inches between exhibits relating to
different topics; better still, by putting up actual barriers between
the exhibits, as is done in the exhibit opposite page 70. The barrier
has the advantage of holding the eye at one spot, so that there is no
temptation to desert one exhibit for the lure of a bright color or a
curious device farther on.

Another consideration in arranging material is that groups relating
to one subject should be so placed that their relation to one another
and to the whole be quickly recognized. Sometimes exhibits that belong
together are separated because variety of size and shape makes it
inconvenient to work out a suitable arrangement. It is worth while
to plan carefully in advance the kinds of exhibit material that will
harmoniously illustrate a given topic; also to have the sizes and
shapes conform to the dimensions of the space reserved for them.


SOME OBSERVATIONS FROM PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE

In a letter describing the exhibit car of the Canadian Forestry
Association, Mr. J. R. Dickson, who was in charge of the car, makes
some interesting observations regarding the arrangement of exhibits
based on his experiences. He writes in part as follows:

 The people, especially at crowded hours, all tend to travel through an
 exhibit car in one direction and this is very desirable inasmuch as
 the man in charge of the car can regularly escort through it group
 after group of eager sightseers or inquirers after knowledge and keep
 up a cross between a lecture and a conversation with them, answering
 their questions and drawing their attention to all the pertinent
 points in the exhibit which they might otherwise overlook.

 To accomplish this plan of car lecturing most effectually, the entire
 exhibit should be arranged so far as possible in a natural sequence,
 beginning at one end of the car and ending at the other. This of
 course is where a single aisle is provided down one side of the car.
 Such a scheme makes one’s talk logical and so helps to impress the
 lessons of the exhibit in such a way that they are remembered easily
 and intelligently....

 On entering the car the first object to attract the visitor’s eye
 was a large map of Canada, showing the forestry belt of 400,000,000
 acres, over 90 per cent of this timber land being publicly owned. When
 told that each citizen of Canada, man, woman and child, owned on the
 average fifty acres of this national resource, the imagination and the
 pocket-nerve of the visitor were at once stimulated and he or she was
 thereafter taking a personal interest in the whole exhibit.

 The visitor next turned to a nursery of small pine and spruce
 illustrating the essential beginning of all our forest wealth and
 also suggesting the basic importance of land classification in order
 that every acre may be put to its best use. Then our modern methods
 of protecting both such young growth and the resulting mature timber
 were examined and explained, and the great need for good laws and
 the generous expenditure of public money in order to safeguard their
 forests, was readily seen and agreed to....

 Before leaving, the visitor ... was handed a copy of the last Canadian
 Forestry Association Journal, and given a brief description of the
 nation-building work of this society, together with an addressed card
 inviting him to join.

 Finally he inspected a cabinet filled with highly finished samples
 of Canadian woods, and the last thing his eye rested upon and which
 impressed itself on his memory as he left the car, was this bold fire
 warning: “A tree will make a million matches; a match will burn a
 million trees.”


ARRANGEMENT OF CAR FOR DEMONSTRATIONS

When an audience is to be gathered in a car to witness a demonstration
or hear an illustrated talk, the first requirement is that the speaker
can be easily heard and each process plainly seen by everyone in the
car. The second is that the audience shall be comfortably seated if the
demonstration is to last longer than fifteen or twenty minutes. This is
about the limit of time that an audience will stand without becoming
restless. The illustration on the opposite page shows an interior
especially constructed for cooking demonstrations, or rather for brief
object lessons, as a feature of the Pennsylvania Food Conservation
Train. The demonstrator stands on a platform raised a foot higher than
the floor. A counter extending the length of the car curves out at
the center to leave a space for the platform and small kitchen. The
maximum space for a standing audience is provided, and all are within
easy range of the speaker’s voice and near enough to see the objects
in her hand. The space below the counter is lined with cupboards.
A similar arrangement might be suitable for any demonstration or
illustrated talk in which few objects are used, provided the counter is
raised high enough to show the entire process. If the extension of the
counter along the sides were left out the space could be used to seat
an audience around a raised central platform.

[Illustration: CAR ESPECIALLY DESIGNED FOR COOKING DEMONSTRATIONS

 A demonstration kitchen, Pennsylvania Food Conservation Train, with a
 raised platform for the demonstrator. The extension of the counter at
 either side of the kitchen provides exhibit space. Discussion on page
 92.]


FOOTNOTES:

[7] See illustrations opposite pages 70, 85, and 92.




                                 VIII

                    THE TOUR OF THE TRUCK OR TRAIN


Many factors enter into the planning of an itinerary, a time schedule,
and the managing of audiences. What places to visit; whether within a
given period of time allotted to the whole tour it is better to make a
number of short stops at many places, or long stops at fewer places;
whether a large or small audience of a particular kind is desired;
whether visitors at train or truck should be encouraged to stay as
long as they will or to remain only through a definite prearranged
program, and then to move on in order to make room for others. All
these questions must be answered before the tour begins, or better,
after a brief trial trip. In some instances, special circumstances
will exist that leave no room for choice in such a matter as, for
example, the number of stops to be made. But ordinarily there are many
decisions to make and they should be made in relation to the definite
purpose of the tour. Perhaps the whole series of difficulties that
arise may be summed up in two words--“don’t crowd.” As has already been
suggested, the purpose itself should be simple and limited, not crowded
with the attempt to achieve the impossible, so that there is no room
for the definite immediate purpose to stand out boldly where it can
be seen. Don’t attempt to crowd into this brief tour the information
or activities that belongs in the follow-up program. The same advice
extends down to the handling of audiences and every other feature.


THE PLACES TO BE VISITED

In considering the type of places to be visited, the two main
considerations are the size of the place and whether it contains the
kinds of people who may be expected to take an interest in the subject
matter. Many of those who have conducted trains report that they
create more interest in communities of ten thousand or less than in
larger places. The larger the town the more varied and numerous are
the rival attractions. In the cities the train yards are often busier
than elsewhere and, therefore, the noise and confusion as well as the
difficulty of handling crowds at the train is greater unless the train
be stationed away from the busy yards.

The towns should be selected with reference to the relation of the
community to the subject matter. To take an obvious example, it would
hardly be appropriate to send an agricultural train into a mining town.
The whole plan of campaign may have been made in relation to one type
of population, either rural or industrial, and it is rather a waste of
time to try to make it serve a population of a kind that it has not
been prepared for.

In planning the itinerary of a tour that must be completed in a
given length of time, it is usually necessary to decide between the
importance of visiting a small number of towns and of making a long
stop in each, or of visiting a larger number for fewer hours or days.
Some trains have made from five to ten stops in a day, while others
have spent from several days to a week in one place. A day to a town,
however, seems to be the more general rule.

A stop may be limited to an hour or so because it is thought more
important to cover a given amount of territory within certain time
limits than it is to stay long enough in a place to reach a large share
of the population or give much information. Or the purpose of the tour
may be accomplished by presenting to an audience, all of whose members
arrive at the same time, a single program lasting an hour and dealing
with easily understood facts or ideas. The Liberty Loan trains furnish
good illustrations of a purpose of this sort. If your campaigners are
not in a hurry to get over the ground by a certain date they will
probably find it more satisfactory to spend a full day and sometimes
longer with the people of each community visited. The program may then
be repeated for a number of audiences and the traveling specialists
will have an opportunity to promote closer relationships with local
leaders. However, conditions that govern a decision regarding the
length of time to spend at a place differ so widely for individual
enterprises that general suggestions have not much value.

The stops of a truck tour are more easily arranged than those of
a train since the latter is dependent upon the convenience of the
railroad. One gain through this greater flexibility is the possibility
of return visits to the same place. In this way the truck helps in
its own advance publicity work by making a brief stay which attracts
attention and spreads the news of its return for a longer stay a
little later. In its work in the congested districts of the city, the
Cleveland Children’s Year Special followed what its director called
a “skip stop” system, visiting a neighborhood long enough to leave
a number of people sufficiently well informed to talk about it, and
coming back two or three days later to find an appreciative audience
ready for the program.


RECEIVING THE VISITORS[8]

Visitors are the real reason for the enterprise which is undertaken
solely for their instruction or benefit if results are hoped for, and
they should not be forgotten at any stage of the planning. We have
already considered them in the choice of subject matter, the form and
quantity of the material, and its arrangement. Now, having equipment
and plans ready, what shall be done with the visitors when they arrive
at the train?

Obviously, their comfort and convenience should be prepared for and
every possible help provided for them to understand and enjoy what
is displayed. Plans for doing these things should be based on the
expectation of as large an attendance as can be handled satisfactorily,
and even on some overcrowding, unless small groups are deliberately
sought.

As is explained in the section on advance work, local committees should
be appointed whose members will co-operate with the regular staff of
the train.

A reception committee may welcome special delegations and introduce
them to the members of the train staff. If there is a formal program,
local leaders are usually asked to take part in it, and as it is
important in relation to the follow-up work that they have the
opportunity to familiarize themselves with the subject matter and the
methods demonstrated on the train, their presence throughout the day
should be secured by advance arrangements. An added value in having
them at the train is that in the eyes of visitors they will become
identified with the movement and thus be in a better position to lead
in the local follow-up work.

Helpers are needed to look after the safety of the visitors, to form
any waiting crowds into lines, direct people to the entrance, keep
them moving in a single direction, prevent unnecessary congestion
at any given point, and note questions and suggestions that should
be passed on to members of the staff. If local volunteers are well
prepared to perform these services the saving of strain on the
hard-worked staff will be very great.


THE RATE OF PROGRESS IN EXHIBIT CARS

Reports show that managers of trains have been satisfied with both
extremes in the rate of progress of visitors in moving through the
train. One train director reported with pride that by his system he was
able to “run 5,000 through in an hour.” At the other extreme are the
directors who during their stay in a town give a single demonstration
in a car that holds only about one hundred people.

The method of “running people through” very rapidly is useful only if
the exhibits are simply curiosities or objects of interest that may be
quickly noted, and that we may risk having soon forgotten without loss
to the cause that is being served. For example, the Liberty Loan trains
depended chiefly on their program of talks, music, and the appearance
of the returned soldiers to arouse interest. The large guns displayed
on flat cars were visible while the talking was going on. It did not
particularly matter after that whether visitors were passed through
the trophy car so rapidly that they had only a glimpse of the various
objects.

On the other hand, the attendance in one place of so small a number as
one hundred would hardly justify the work of planning and carrying out
a tour unless either the small group are carefully selected as leaders
capable of passing on the information to others, or the community is so
small that this number is as many as might be expected. It ought to be
possible to estimate in advance, or at least after the first week of
the tour, the length of time required for the average person to see all
that is important for him to see and understand. With this period in
mind it is possible to estimate the number of people who can be handled
in a given length of time. For example, we may assume the following
conditions:

 A train of three cars.

 Number that can be accommodated comfortably in each car at one time,
 60.

 Twenty minutes, required time to see the exhibits or hear and see
 demonstrations in each car, or one hour for the train.

 Train on view six hours.

 Maximum attendance practicable during the stop, 1,080 people.

The attendance is, of course, never distributed so evenly as this over
the day, and all the visitors do not stay exactly the same length of
time. Probably with a fairly even distribution a train with a maximum
capacity of one thousand will handle satisfactorily about eight hundred
people. An estimate of the rate at which visitors may be passed along
will be found exceedingly useful in deciding many questions, such as
the arrangement and content of the exhibits, the length of time to
continue a demonstration, the number of times to repeat it, the length
of the stay, and the quota of attendance to work for in the advance
publicity.

For example, would you rather have fewer people and have those who
come stay longer, or would you prefer having a larger attendance with
those who compose it spending less time with you? The selection of
exhibits and the program should be arranged according to your decision
on these points. If you are giving a few people detailed information
which it would serve your purpose better to give to a larger number,
you are throwing away your opportunity for want of a little careful
calculation. The mistake most frequently made is to plan exhibits and
programs on the expectation of having each visitor spend a long time at
the train carefully examining each display, and then when the people
arrive, to pass crowds through quickly without giving them a chance to
see what has been prepared for them.


DISTRIBUTING THE ATTENDANCE

Apparently not many of those who have conducted trains have attempted
through their advance work to prepare for arbitrary distribution of
attendance over the entire period that the exhibit is open. The period
from two to five o’clock in the afternoon seems to have been found the
most popular by the largest number of those reporting on attendance,
with some falling off reported after four o’clock. The period before
ten in the morning is agreed upon unanimously as the poorest time to
get people out. The experiences reported as to the hourly attendance
between ten and four o’clock varies so widely that it would seem to
indicate that under the right conditions it should be possible to get
people to come throughout this period.

Good advance work can fill up many idle hours. A description of methods
of advance work to accomplish this is contained in another chapter,
but while we are considering the visitors it may be well to look over
the groups that could most easily come at the least attractive hours.
On a number of trains arrangements were made to have school children
attend with their teachers according to a prearranged schedule, usually
during the morning hours. This is an especially good plan when the
train is on view all day, because the children tell their experiences
when they go home at noon and thus help to get their parents to attend
in the afternoon. If there are a larger number of school children than
can be handled conveniently it is a good idea to limit attendance to
the older children, basing the lower age limit on the estimated number
of children that can be accommodated. If they do not fill up the train
completely during the morning, it is possible to arrange for the
attendance of delegations of leading citizens and other representative
groups who come in a body to welcome the train when it is opened to the
public, or to be personally escorted through it at a given time. This,
of course, has news value as well as the advantage of using the morning
hours. The Safety First Train of the government at each stop arranged
to have such a morning delegation.

In some places the noon hour may be used for the attendance of factory
workers and other employed people who are not far from the train. This
is successful if advance preparations are made and if the subject
matter is of interest to the workers. It is often possible to adapt the
program and some part of the displays to their interests. Using the
noon hour depends, of course, on having a large enough staff to allow
each member an hour for lunch. The period from five to eight o’clock
in the afternoon is probably of the least value. Usually the staff
members themselves need relaxation during this time if there is to be
an evening session.[9] If there is no session the train may pull out
late in the afternoon. If, however, it is desirable to make use of this
period, it may be possible to arrange for personal conferences or group
conferences at the train or in town with persons especially interested
in the subject who wish to have information that is not of interest to
the general public or to talk over plans for the future.

Reports as to the success of evening sessions vary greatly. Many have
used the evening successfully for outdoor motion pictures or for
meetings in town. The fact that many who could not leave their work
during the day can come then seems to argue that it is possible to have
a good attendance if the advance work has been thorough--provided also
that the location of the car or train is satisfactory and that the time
schedule will permit.


EXPLAINING THE EXHIBITS

While the exhibits should be so simple and well arranged as to be
easily understood, any exhibit of objects, pictures, and printed words
is more enjoyed and appreciated if it is brought to life by a personal
interpretation given with enthusiasm. The explainer calls attention
to what is displayed much as a chairman introduces a speaker. A good
introduction makes the audience more friendly and responsive to either
a speaker or an exhibit. The explainer who travels the length of the
car with one group can take care of only a few people at a time, and
if there is a continuous movement of people through the car only
about one-third of them have the advantage of the explanation. If, on
the outside or in another car, a lecture or demonstration precedes
the reviewing of exhibits, the speaker may close the talk with an
explanation of the purpose and character of the exhibits and some
suggestions as to what to look for. With this preparation people may
pass through the car unattended and perhaps meet an explainer at the
far end who will answer questions and give out literature together with
an invitation to take part in the follow-up program. Or the explainer
may meet people as they enter the car and give a brief introduction to
the exhibits.

Local people, with general information on the subject, can give
valuable help in explaining points about particular exhibits which
have to be repeated many times. These helpers should receive advance
material and in addition should come to the train for coaching before
it opens and be stationed at assigned positions.

Staff members who are continually meeting people, work under
considerable strain and may easily become tired or indifferent through
over-work. So much depends on their enthusiasm and their readiness to
offer help that this factor should be carefully checked up, and if any
member of the staff shows signs of losing interest or failing to get a
response he should be replaced or at least given a period of rest. By
relieving staff members of irksome details and by providing in other
ways for their comfort, as well as by arranging the schedule of hours
so that they do not work beyond their strength in any one period, much
can be done to avoid this loss of freshness and enthusiasm.


FOOTNOTES:

[8] The discussion in this section is handled in terms of trains for
the sake of clearness and convenience, but generally the application
is to single cars as well as to trains, and to automobiles or motor
trucks or caravans of the same. The paragraphs not applicable to trucks
are fairly obvious. However, it is urged that maximum results from a
truck tour call for much the same carefully detailed preparation and
management as a tour with a train.

[9] This fact, further discussed on p. 105, deserves considerable
emphasis.




                                  IX

                            FOLLOW-UP WORK


In a previous chapter it was pointed out that the purpose of a tour
may be to give information, to create interest in a new movement that
is being launched, to revive interest that has become dull, or to
serve as an attention-arresting feature of an intensive campaign that
aims to produce some immediate results. All of these aims point to the
need of planning definite follow-up work. It will not do to let people
forget what they have learned or lose interest in it through neglect.
If the tour means simply that ideas or facts are dropped down into each
community, like seeds scattered by the winds without provision for
later cultivating, they have a smaller chance to take root and grow.

Psychology has demonstrated that there is a “curve of forgetting.”
Hollingworth described it as follows:

 When a given appeal is addressed to me, I straightway proceed to
 forget it. But I do not forget it at a uniform rate, so much being
 forgotten on each succeeding day until all is forgotten. Instead,
 I forget the material that has been seen or learned, according to
 a definite “curve of forgetting,” a curve which descends rapidly
 at first and then more slowly. The larger proportion of material is
 forgotten in the first day or so. After that a constantly decreasing
 amount is forgotten on each succeeding day.[10]

How may the impression made by the program and exhibits of the train
be fixed in the minds of its visitors promptly, so that forgetting may
be delayed until results are obtained? Several simple methods suggest
themselves. We will take up here mainly those things that can be done
while the train is in town or soon after its departure, as we are
concerned only with the part that the train tour plays in the whole
program of the organization that sends it out.


GETTING THE SUBJECT TALKED ABOUT

If the visitors talk about what they saw and heard they are likely to
remember it much longer and more accurately than if they do not. The
principles discussed elsewhere, of simplicity of form, concentration
on one main topic, orderly arrangement, and lack of crowding in both
exhibits and programs, have a definite application to getting the
subject talked about. People speak vaguely and in general terms about
what they have not clearly understood. We may imagine that A, who saw
the train, meets B, who did not, and the following conversation takes
place:

 A: Did you see the health train yesterday?

 B: No, how was it?

 A: Oh, fine! great! You certainly missed it. There was a good crowd
 out, too.

 B: What was it all about?

 A: Oh, fresh air and not letting the babies die. You’d be surprised
 how many people die that could be prevented. And they say the town
 ought to have a nurse to look after the school children, and a
 hospital for--let’s see, I’ve forgotten now about the hospital.

 B: I see. Just a scheme of the politicians to make jobs for a lot of
 people. I always thought this was a pretty healthy town and I do yet.

 A: No, you’ve got it wrong, B, but I can’t make it clear to you. I
 can’t talk like the fellow at the train. You ought to have heard him.
 He made a great speech.

If A has no clearer idea than this to pass on to B the next day, he
himself is not likely to stay interested and, much less, convinced
for very long. One of the best tests of the argument presented at the
train is whether the talk about it afterward is general or particular,
confused or clear and accurate in repeating facts and reasons. It
is worth while to arrange with local co-operators as a part of the
follow-up work to sound people as to what interested them and what
they think of the suggestions that were made. Many changes, sometimes
small ones, but important, nevertheless, can be made on the basis of
criticisms brought out in these interviews.


PRINTED MATTER FOR DISTRIBUTION

Another way of helping to see that the train message is remembered
is by distributing the right kind of printed matter. Every traveling
campaign carries with it leaflets or pamphlets for visitors to take
home. Sometimes a handful of assorted pieces of printed matter is given
to each visitor with a reckless disregard of their appropriateness to
the purpose of the campaign or the probability of their being read. One
of the most frequent blunders made by managers of campaigns of this
sort is to assume that all that is learned at the exhibit or meeting
will be remembered, and that the printed matter should give additional
information. In a baby saving campaign, a health department is likely
to give out in addition to printed matter about babies, other leaflets
on hookworm or tuberculosis. Giving away printed matter on topics in
which no interest has been cultivated is wasteful since it is not
likely to be read or, if read, distracts attention from the main topic.

In most cases, one piece of carefully prepared printed matter on one
subject is enough for general distribution. A useful leaflet might well
include a summary of the main arguments of the teachings contained in
the exhibits, together with sketches or photographs and a clear and
appealing statement of the action desired, whether it is support of a
bill in the legislature, membership in an organization, or the forming
of health habits. This leaflet should not fail to give information as
to how and where further facts may be obtained. If it seems desirable
to interest people in a number of additional subjects, the better way
is to have leaflets on them displayed where they can be examined and to
have a supply of addressed postcards listing these special publications
and on which visitors may check those they wish to have sent to them.


PUBLICITY FOLLOWING THE TRAIN’S STOP

There should be a readable account of the train in the first issue of
the local paper following its visit. Those who visited it will like to
read the account of what they saw and in doing so will be reminded of a
number of features of the exhibits and talks that were rapidly slipping
from their memories. The train director would do well to see that the
local paper receives as good copy for this follow-up story as for
advance publicity. The people who came and what they said about it adds
to the news value of the story.

Other forms of publicity may be used to advantage immediately following
the visit of the train, such as a series of special articles appearing
weekly in the local paper, printed matter mailed to a list of people
obtained at the train, or a motion picture shown in the local picture
theater, at a meeting or a contest that may reach its climax at some
later event, such as the county or state fair.


ORGANIZATION OF LOCAL FORCES

Leading men and women to take some action as the result of interest
aroused at the train is the surest way to get the message remembered
and is the aim of most educational campaigns. This action may be
something very simple and concrete, or it may be the entering wedge of
some continuous activity. One of the simplest steps, which has already
been referred to, is the writing of local people to headquarters for
information or for literature. This serves the purpose also of renewing
interest when the material sent for arrives and it helps the central
organization to make up mailing lists. Local organizations should
be encouraged to send for reference material to use in talks and
discussions.

Launching or boosting a permanent movement at a meeting held during
the train visit is one good way of starting follow-up work. Many an
effort that promised much because of local enthusiasm at the start has
died a natural death, because after the specialists from the state or
national headquarters have departed, local leaders find themselves
without any clear-cut program to begin work on or any recognized
leadership. An informal meeting of the train staff and local leaders
at which temporary committees are formed and definite plans discussed
may be one of the most useful features of the train program. It has
been suggested elsewhere that the hour of the day least popular with
visitors may be a good time for such a meeting. A still better method
is an early visit after the departure of the train, of an organizer or
consultant who will advise about plans.

An interesting report of the follow-up organization work carried on in
connection with its health car, comes from the West Virginia Public
Health Council:

 Wherever possible a temporary committee was formed before leaving the
 community, this committee being chosen by a group of representative
 people in a community meeting in the interests of health education
 at which time child welfare work was emphasized. At this meeting
 we made an effort to secure the attendance of medical, dental, and
 nursing professions, of the mayor and town council, school board,
 and school superintendent and teachers, ministers and Sunday school
 superintendents, fraternal organizations, women’s clubs, Red Cross,
 and any other organizations directly or indirectly interested in
 community welfare work. The temporary committee was appointed
 to secure a permanent organization based upon the interest and
 enthusiasm already created, this permanent committee to undertake a
 definite health program for the community. In addition to this we are
 keeping in touch with the various communities visited, by frequent
 correspondence, and the director of the Division of Child Hygiene has
 already returned to a number of the communities to help in the making
 of plans, to stimulate interest and enthusiasm, and in every way
 possible to promote health education and public health nursing. We are
 now formulating county-wide and state-wide plans for the furtherance
 of this work through co-operation with the Extension Division of the
 Agricultural Department of the State University and American Red Cross.

An incidental but important factor in promoting continuous follow-up
work is that local representatives of the movement, especially the
salaried worker, if there is one, should take an active part in the
program of the train, so as to become identified with the impressions
and ideas gained here in the minds of the people who visited the train.


CHECKING UP RESULTS

As bearing upon the question of any future use of a similar method of
campaigning, “checking up” results is good, although it may not always
be easy or bring entirely conclusive evidence. The method described
in the account of the Cleveland Children’s Year Special, which is a
dispensary truck, is suggestive. Cards of invitation to visit the
local dispensary were given out at the truck and the number that were
turned into the dispensary was noted by the nurses. Nurses also asked
new visitors during the following month where they had learned of the
dispensary, and recorded it when the visit was directly or indirectly a
result of the Special.

Reports may be requested from local editors, school superintendents,
and others who meet many people, regarding the responsiveness of the
people to ideas promulgated at the train. The number and the nature of
inquiries received at headquarters from places that have been visited
may also serve as an indication of the effectiveness with which the
message has been presented.

Finally on the matter of follow-up work, one of the chief criticisms
that may be made of much educational publicity is that it is spasmodic
and unrelated. This is often due to the fact that the planning of
follow-up work is left until the campaign is at its height or until
it is over. By that time the workers at headquarters and in the field
are too absorbed in the detail of running the affair, or a new project
is under way. All the resources and energy have gone into running the
campaign and none is left for securing results. In the advance planning
of the whole campaign, allowance should be made in the budget for a
definite program of follow-up work as well as in the time of staff
members needed to carry it out.


FOOTNOTES:

[10] Hollingworth, H. L.: Advertising and Selling, New York, D.
Appleton & Co.




                               APPENDIX

REFERENCE LISTS OF TRAIN, TRUCK, TROLLEY, AND OTHER TRAVELING CAMPAIGNS


The lists below include traveling educational campaigns about which we
have obtained reasonably accurate information. The two chief sources
of further information about these projects are the state colleges of
agriculture and state boards of health. Very little information about
tours is available in published form. Articles in class publications
giving brief accounts of a few of the tours and a few special reports
about tours are listed in Appendix B.

In practically all the train tours, one or more railroads have
co-operated at least to the extent of supplying cars and free
transportation, and sometimes bearing a considerable share of the work
and expenses of the tour. Our lists, we realize, do not always give the
full credit to co-operating railroads and other participants, but as
much is given as it was possible to ascertain and to indicate within
the space limits.

We are aware, also, that the list is by no means a complete record of
educational tours. Information is coming in continually about tours
that we had not known of before. The main purpose, however, is to
give a general idea of the purposes, forms, and extent of traveling
campaigns in recent years, together with only a few of such details as
may help the inquirer decide where to look further for suggestions that
may be of assistance in his particular case.

The list does not include tours of trucks or trains for service only,
as, for example, library trucks or laboratory trains. Neither does it
include “chapel cars,” that is, railroad cars, motor vehicles, and
boats, for religious services or instruction, such as have been sent
out by various religious bodies for many years.


AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD CONSERVATION TRAINS

 =Canada. Better Farming Train.= Subject: assistance in every phase of
 farm life. Saskatchewan Department of Agriculture and the College of
 Agriculture of the Provincial University co-operated with Canadian
 Pacific Railway. 1918 and 1919. Thirteen cars with exhibits or
 equipment for demonstrations and lectures. Prominent professors and
 agricultural officials served as demonstrators and lecturers.

 =Sheep Car.= Subject: breeding and shearing of sheep. Live Stock
 Branch, Department of Agriculture at Ottawa. 1919. One car of
 exhibits. Demonstrations of shearing machine given on farms.

 =Special Dairy Car.= Subject: dairying. Saskatchewan Department of
 Agriculture, College of Agriculture, and Canadian Northern Railway.
 1916. Lecture coach and tourist sleeper for speakers. Exhibits with
 stereopticon and lectures.

 =United States. Poultry and Egg Demonstration Car.= Subject:
 demonstrations of proper methods of handling and keeping poultry and
 eggs. Bureau of Chemistry, United States Department of Agriculture.
 1913 to 1918.

 =Arkansas. Peach Culture Demonstration Train.= Subject: proper methods
 of peach tree pruning and spraying. Co-operatively run by Agricultural
 Departments of Missouri Pacific and Cotton Belt Railroads, American
 Refrigerator Transit Company, and State College of Agriculture. 1918.
 Two baggage cars for exhibits; large automobile freight car carried
 orchard machinery. Exhibits explained by horticulturists, on the cars;
 lectures and demonstrations given in nearby orchard.

 =California. Dairy Special.= Subject: dairying and hog raising. State
 College of Agriculture. 1913 and 1914. Lectures, conferences, and
 exhibits relative to the industry.

  =Agricultural and Food Production Train.= Subjects: methods of
  stimulating growth of certain crops, interest in increasing food
  production, and particularly bean culture. State Colleges of
  Agriculture of Nevada and Utah and Salt Lake Railroad co-operated with
  California’s State College of Agriculture. 1917. Demonstrations and
  lectures.

  =Agricultural and Home Economics Train.= State College of Agriculture,
  co-operated with Southern Pacific Railroad. 1908 and 1909. Ten coaches
  for exhibits and lectures, a dining car, and sleeper to accommodate
  demonstrators and lecturers. Demonstrations and lectures.

  =Agricultural and Horticultural Train.= Subject: methods of restoring
  fertility and depleted soils, plant culture, pest and disease
  extermination, viticulture, dairying, animal industry, seeding and
  soil treatment. State College of Agriculture, Southern Pacific and
  Santa Fé Railroads. Annually, 1908 to 1913. Several exhibit cars,
  lecture cars, sleeping car, and diner.

  =Good Roads Special.= Subject: improvement of roads, Frisco Railway
  System. 1912. Four coaches and locomotive. Exhibits, lectures and
  demonstrations.

 =Florida. Food Production Increase Train.= Florida Seaboard Air Line.
 1917. Demonstrations.

 =Georgia. Land Clearing Special.= Subject: stump pulling and uses
 of tractors and other farm machinery. State College of Agriculture,
 stump puller companies and tractor manufacturers, Georgia Landowners’
 Association, and the Railroad Administration co-operated. 1919.
 Passenger coach and four flat cars for lectures and demonstrations,
 caboose and sleeper for traveling campaigners, and two box cars
 for equipment and machinery transportation. Motion picture shows,
 demonstrations, and lectures.

 =Illinois. Home Economics Car.= Subject: household science. State
 College of Agriculture. 1916-1918. Demonstrations and exhibits.

  =Dairy Trains.= State College of Agriculture and the Chicago and
  Eastern Illinois Railroad. 1916, 1917, 1919. Three coaches for
  lectures, automobile car and flat car for demonstrations and exhibits,
  and a locomotive. Demonstrations of milking machine, lectures and
  exhibits.

  =Dairy Train.= Subject: uses of separators, sterilizers, and other
  dairy machines. State College of Agriculture and C. C. C. & St. L.
  Railroad. 1916 and 1917. Lecture coach for motion pictures, baggage
  car for exhibits, and Arms Palace horse car for cattle.

  =Dairy Train.= Subject: proper use of dairy machinery. State College
  of Agriculture and Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. 1916 and 1917. Pullman
  car for attendants; stock car carried cattle, which were taken for
  demonstrations to some prominent place in towns visited. Lectures in
  court houses and town halls.

  =Dixie Jersey Special.= Subject: more and better dairy cattle.
  American Jersey Cattle Club, agents of Department of Agriculture
  and railroad trade promotion bureaus. In Illinois, Louisiana,
  Mississippi, and Tennessee. 1920. Arms Palace horse cars for cattle
  and Pullmans for personnel.

 =Indiana. Seed Corn Special.= Subject: corn culture. Erie Railroad and
 Purdue University Agricultural Experiment Station. 1909. Lecture train.

  =Alfalfa Lecture Train.= Subject: better alfalfa production. Purdue
  University Agricultural Experiment Station. 1912.

  =Corn Improvement Lecture Train.= Subject: better corn. Lake Erie
  and Western Railroad and Purdue University Agricultural Experiment
  Station. 1911.

  =Dairy Feeding Lecture Train.= Subject: better cattle feeding and
  care. Purdue University Agricultural Experiment Station and several
  railroads. 1915.

  =Dairy Special Production Train.= Subject: increase of dairy
  production. Southern Railroad and Purdue University Agricultural
  Experiment Station. April 1 to 7, 1913.

  =Dairy Special Train.= Subject: dairying. Monon Railway Company,
  Purdue University Agricultural Experiment Station, and State Dairy
  Association. 1907. Baggage car, two lecture coaches, and private
  dining and sleeping car. Lectures, exhibits, and demonstrations.

  =Milk Production Special Train.= Subject: care and production of milk.
  Purdue University Agricultural Experiment Station and Erie Railroad.
  1909. Seven car train. Lectures and demonstrations.

  =Onion Improvement Lecture Train.= Subject: increase of onion crops.
  Chicago, Indiana and Southern Railroad. 1911.

  =Seed Corn Special.= Subject: corn culture. Monon Railway Company,
  Purdue University Agricultural Experiment Station, Indiana Corn
  Growers’ Association, Indiana Grain Dealers’ Association. 1906.
  Engine, baggage car, coach for lectures, and a coach for the
  attendants. Lectures, exhibits, and demonstrations.

  =Wheat Improvement Train.= Subject: wheat culture. Southern Railroad
  and Purdue University Agricultural Experiment Station. 1912. Lectures
  and demonstrations of culture and fertilization; control of insects
  and diseases.

 =Iowa. Dairy Special.= Subject: better dairy products. Illinois Central
 Railroad. 1916. Three cars for exhibits, demonstrations, and living
 quarters for speakers.

  =Seed Corn Special.= Iowa Grain Dealers’ Association. 1910.

 =Kansas. Hessian Fly Special.= Subject: control of Hessian fly. State
 College of Agriculture and Santa Fé Railroad. 1915. Baggage car for
 equipment, two steel coaches for lectures and demonstrations, and
 private car for attendants.

 =Kentucky. Agricultural Exhibit Train.= Subject: general education
 in matters pertaining to agriculture and dairy improvements. State
 Department of Agriculture. 1912. Four lecture cars, stock car, sleeper,
 and diner. Lectures, exhibits, and demonstrations.

 =Louisiana. Dixie Jersey Special.= See Illinois.

 =Maryland. Farmers’ Institute Train.= Subject: dairying. State College
 of Agriculture. 1913. Lecture car and stock car. Demonstrations and
 lectures.

 =Michigan. Food Demonstration Train.= Michigan Agricultural College.
 1917.

 =Minnesota. Advertising Car.= Subject: farm and factory products. State
 Board of Immigration. 1913. One exhibit car.

 =Mississippi. Boll Weevil Special.= Subject: extermination of the
 pests. Illinois Central Railroad, 1908.

  =Dixie Jersey Special.= See Illinois.

 =Missouri. Patriotic Special.= Subject: food conservation and work of
 Women’s Committee. Women’s Committee on Food Conservation, Council
 of National Defense. August, 1917. Lecture and demonstration car.
 Stereopticon lectures and demonstrations.

 =Nebraska. Agricultural Train.= Subject: dairying and seed corn. State
 College of Agriculture. 1918. Two cars for exhibits and demonstrations.

  =Conservation Special.= Subject: food conservation and preservation.
  Union Pacific Railroad Company co-operated with Nebraska College of
  Agriculture and others. 1917. Train included business car and living
  quarters for staff. Illustrated lectures were given in public halls.

 =Nevada. Agricultural and Food Production Train.= Co-operatively run
 with State Colleges of California, Nevada, and Utah, and Salt Lake
 Railroad. 1916 and 1917. See California.

 =New Jersey. Save the Surplus Special.= Subject: food conservation and
 other war measures. State College of Agriculture and Lehigh Valley
 Railroad. 1917. Two coaches, one for exhibits and the other for
 lectures. Toured New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Demonstrations, lectures,
 and exhibits.

 =New York. Victory Special.= Subject: introduction of wheat, meat, and
 sugar substitutes and other food conservation methods. State College of
 Agriculture, Food Administration and New York Central, Lehigh Valley,
 D. & H., D., L. & W., and Long Island Railroads. 1917, 1918, 1919.
 Demonstrations and exhibits on train of two coaches.

  =Apple Packing Train.= Subject: instruction in requirements of law
  relating to apple grading. State Department of Agriculture and New
  York Central Railroad. 1915. Baggage car with equipment, lecture car
  with capacity of 100 persons, and car for living quarters.

  =Better Seed Special.= Subject: standard types of seeds; reliable
  sources; proper methods of controlling common diseases. State
  College of Agriculture, New York Central, Lehigh Valley, Ontario and
  Western, Erie, and Delaware and Hudson Railroads. 1919. Exhibits and
  demonstrations in two coaches.

  =Potato Demonstration Car.= State College of Agriculture, County Farm
  Bureaus, and Lehigh Valley Railroad. 1917. Exhibits and
  demonstrations.

  =Sheep Demonstration Train.= Subject: breeding, feeding, and care of
  sheep. State College of Agriculture, New York Central and New York,
  Ontario and Western Railroads. 1917. Exhibits and demonstrations.

 =North Carolina. North Carolina Car.= Subject: farm machinery and
 dairying. State Department of Agriculture co-operating with several
 railroads. Lectures and exhibits with stereopticon slides and moving
 pictures in baggage cars; demonstrations given out of doors.

  =Better Farming Special.= Subjects: better dairying, domestic
  science, food conservation, and sanitary methods. Agricultural and
  Industrial Department of Norfolk and Western Railway, State College
  of Agriculture of North Carolina, and Virginia Agricultural and
  Mechanical College. 1915-1916. Nine cars for exhibits, demonstrations,
  lectures, and living quarters for attendants.

  =Corn Growers’ Special.= Norfolk and Southern Railway and Experiment
  Station of the Agricultural and Mechanical College. 1908.

  =Farmers’ Institutes.= Subject: agriculture and domestic science.
  North Carolina Department of Agriculture, Seaboard Air Line, and
  Southern Railway. Two railroad cars, one a coach with two of the seats
  removed and a model kitchen substituted, and a baggage car equipped
  with farm and dairy machinery. 1908-1910. Lectures and demonstrations
  on the train and outdoors.

 =Pennsylvania. Food Conservation Train.= Pennsylvania Food
 Administration, State College of Agriculture, and Pennsylvania
 Railroad. 1917 and 1918. Two demonstration cars and one exhibit car.

  =Save the Surplus Special.= Toured this state and New Jersey. 1916 and
  1917. See New Jersey.

 =Tennessee. Agricultural Train.= Subject: better farming and food
 production. Agricultural Department of Nashville, Chattanooga and St.
 Louis Railroad. One private car and one lecture car. Exhibits and
 demonstrations.

  =Dixie Jersey Special.= See Illinois.

 =Texas. Agricultural Train.= Subject: dairying. Agricultural and
 Mechanical College of Texas. Three coaches for lectures, two exhibit
 cars, automobile car for cattle, flat car with wire fence and canvas
 top for lecture and demonstration platform, a diner and a Pullman for
 campaigners. Lectures, exhibits, and demonstrations. Stereopticon
 slides shown at night in combination with lectures in motion picture
 theater or town hall.

 =Peach Culture Train.= Subject: proper methods of pruning and spraying
 trees, and extermination of insect pests in orchards. Agricultural
 Department of St. Louis Southwestern Railroad of Texas, assisted by
 Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas and State Department of
 Agriculture. 1919 and 1920. Two cars for exhibits and one for orchard
 machinery. Exhibits, demonstrations, and lectures. Similar to train
 run in Arkansas in 1918. See Arkansas.

 =Utah. Agricultural and Food Production Train.= Co-operatively run
 with State Colleges of California, Utah, and Nevada, and the Salt Lake
 Railroad. 1916 and 1917. See California.

 =Virginia. Agricultural Train.= Agricultural and Mechanical College of
 Virginia, and Norfolk and Western Railroad. 1915. Demonstration train.

  =Better Farming Special.= See North Carolina.

 =Washington. Agricultural Train.= State College of Agriculture.
 Lectures with stereopticon slides, sometimes in nearby school or hall;
 exhibits and demonstrations on train.

  =Good Roads Special.= Subject: road and culvert construction and
  maintenance and general highway improvements. Office of Public Roads
  of Washington and several railroad companies co-operated. 1912. Two
  coaches of exhibits and models. Lectures, demonstrations, and
  exhibits.

 =West Virginia. Agricultural Train.= Subject: better farming. Kanawha
 and Michigan, Baltimore and Ohio Railroads, and State College of
 Agriculture. 1912 and 1913. Baggage cars for cattle and coaches for
 lectures. Lectures, demonstrations, and exhibits.

 =Wisconsin. Pure Seed and Home Power Special.= “Soo” Line, Chicago,
 Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad, Wisconsin Bankers Association, and
 State College of Agriculture. 1917. Two cars for demonstrations and
 exhibits.

  =Land Clearing Demonstration Train.= Subject: better farming. State
  College of Agriculture, several land clearing machinery and explosive
  manufacturers, and several railroads co-operated. 1916-1919. Six cars
  consisting of a flat car, two box cars for equipment, two bunk cars,
  and a boarding car for the attendants. Demonstrations and instruction.

  =Stump Pulling Special.= Subject: clearing cut-over lands. State
  College of Agriculture, several land clearing machinery and explosive
  manufacturers, Chicago and Northwestern, and Chicago, Minneapolis and
  St. Paul Railroads. 1916. Flat car, two box cars for equipment, two
  bunk cars, and a boarding car for the attendants. Demonstrations and
  instruction. Similar trains, with some changes in cars used and in
  co-operating agencies, were run in 1917 and 1919.


HEALTH TRAINS

 =United States. First Aid Train.= American Red Cross. 1920. Fully
 equipped railroad coach to render and teach first aid to the injured.
 Treatment and instruction.

 =California. Sanitation Car.= Subject: protection of water supply,
 disposal of sewage, and instruction in disease prevention. State Board
 of Health. 1909. Continued annually. Exhibits and demonstrations.

 =Florida. Sanitation and Health Train.= State Board of Health. 1916
 and 1917. Two exhibit cars. Lectures with motion pictures and slides.

 =Kansas. Health Car “Warren.”= Subject: health and child welfare.
 State Board of Health. 1916. Exhibit car.

 =Kentucky. Health Exhibit Car.= Subject: tuberculosis prevention and
 cure. 1912. Kentucky Tuberculosis Association and several railroads
 co-operated.

 =Louisiana. Health Train.= Subjects: child welfare, food, and disease
 prevention. State Board of Health. 1910. Continuously since then.
 Four cars including an exhibit car, a laboratory car with garage
 compartment carrying Ford car for country trips and quick collection
 of water samples, and two cars for administrative and living quarters.

 =Missouri. Traveling Car Exhibit.= Subject: instruction in
 anti-tuberculosis measures. Missouri Association for the Relief and
 Control of Tuberculosis. 1908. One exhibit coach.

 =West Virginia. Health Car.= State Department of Health. 1919.
 Vestibuled coach, equipped with electrically driven models, posters,
 exhibits of living bacteria, sanitation exhibits, a moving picture
 machine, and a small chemical and bacteriological laboratory in one end
 of the car.

 =Tuberculosis Exhibit Car.= Subject: prevention and cure of
 tuberculosis. West Virginia Tuberculosis League and several railroads.
 1913 and 1914. Car for exhibits and lectures.


MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS--TRAINS

 =Canada. Made-in-Canada Train.= Subject: trade extension. Canadian
 Manufacturers Association. Ten cars for exhibits, demonstrations, and
 moving picture lectures.

 =Exhibition Car.= Subject: conservation of the forests. Canadian
 Forestry Association. 1918 and 1919. Train toured parts of Quebec and
 New Brunswick. Exhibits of products made from wood.

 =Southern States. School on Wheels.= Southern Pacific Railway. 1919.
 Baggage car fitted up as modern school room; accommodates teacher and
 25 pupils.

 =United States. Safety First Train.= Subject: to show what is being
 done to promote safety and health. Department of the Interior
 co-operating with other governmental departments. 1916. Locomotive and
 twelve exhibit and lecture cars.

 =Mine Rescue Car.= Subject: instruction to miners in first aid and
 use of oxygen breathing apparatus. Assistance of car apparatus and
 crew given in case of mine disasters. Bureau of Mines, Department of
 the Interior, 1910; continuous service since then. Present equipment:
 eleven specially constructed coaches with exhibits and emergency
 equipment.

 =Recruiting Cars.= Bureau of Navigation, Navy Department. 1917 and
 1919. Three flat cars fitted up respectively with a model of a
 battleship, destroyer, and torpedo boat. Exhibits and lectures to
 assist in recruiting and also used for promoting Liberty Loan drives.

 =War Relic Trains.= Subject: promotion of Liberty Loan drives, etc.
 Federal Reserve Districts of Treasury Department. 1918 and 1919. Flat
 cars for exhibition of trophies captured from the enemy; baggage car,
 sleeping car, and a locomotive. Toured the United States.

 =New York. Safety First Car.= Subject: instruction in safety measures.
 New York Central lines. 1919. Two duplicate cars for motion pictures
 and lectures.

 =Virginia. Safety First Car.= Subject: instruction in safety measures.
 Norfolk and Western Railroad. 1920. Motion picture and lecture car.


AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD CONSERVATION TRUCKS

 =Canada. Sheep Demonstration Automobile.= Sheep and Goat Division,
 Live Stock Branch, Department of Agriculture, Ottawa. 1919.
 Demonstrations of shearing by hand and power machines, rolling and
 preparing of wool for market, dipping of sheep for vermin, and docking
 and castrating of lambs.

 =Alabama. Movable School.= Subject: agriculture and home economics.
 Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute. 1919. Instruction and
 demonstrations.

 =Louisiana. Agricultural Extension Truck.= Subject: education and
 agriculture. Louisiana State Agricultural and Mechanical College.
 1919. Motion picture and stereopticon lectures.

 =Massachusetts. Food Conservation and Model Kitchen Truck.= Subject:
 canning, food conservation, and substitutes; care and feeding of
 children in wartime. Woman’s Committee, Massachusetts Council of
 Defense. 1918. Demonstrations and instruction.

 =Agricultural Truck.= Massachusetts Agricultural College.
 Demonstrations, exhibits, and stereopticon slide lectures.

  =Food Conservation and Preservation Truck.= Bristol County Farm
  Bureau. In charge of county demonstration agent at Segreganset.
  Exhibits.

 =Ohio. Poultry Demonstration Truck.= Subject: instruction in proper
 methods of handling eggs, care of fowl, and better uses of poultry
 equipment. Ohio State University. 1917. Lectures and demonstrations.
 Evening lectures with stereopticon slides.

 =Pennsylvania. Canning Truck.= Allegheny County Council of
 Defense. 1918. Itinerant service to farmers’ wives at their homes.
 Demonstrations, instruction; canning and drying of home products.

 =Rhode Island. Food Conservation Truck.= State Food Administration.
 1918. Demonstrations and instruction.

 =Virginia. Fruit Growers’ Automobile Tour.= Subject: best methods of
 orchard culture. Extension Division, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
 and Virginia State Horticultural Society. 1918. Automobile tour
 through Virginia and West Virginia by fruit growers.

 =Wisconsin. Agricultural Truck.= Subject: treatment of grain for smut
 and a fanning mill. County agents of the state. 1918. Demonstrations,
 assistance, and instruction.


HEALTH TRUCKS

 =Canada. Traveling Baby Clinic.= University Settlement of Montreal.
 1919. Weighing, measuring, and advisory service.

 =France. Traveling Exposition.= Subject: child welfare and
 tuberculosis. American Commission for the Prevention of Tuberculosis
 in France, Children’s Bureau of the American Red Cross and, later, the
 Tuberculosis Bureau, American Red Cross. 1917 and 1918. Trucks carried
 equipment for lectures, motion pictures, and exhibits.

 =Italy. Tuberculosis Clinics.= American Red Cross Tuberculosis
 Commission. Seven trucks equipped as clinics. Treatment and
 instruction.

  =Dental Trucks.= American Red Cross. Three trucks fitted up as dental
  clinics. Treatment and instruction.

 =United States. Child Welfare Special.= Children’s Bureau, Department
 of Labor. 1919. Lectures, examinations, and well baby clinic.

 =Connecticut. Baby Special.= Subject: infant and child welfare,
 including care, feeding, measuring, and weighing. Child Welfare
 Department, State Council of Defense. 1918. Lectures and advisory
 service.

 =Illinois. Traveling Health Clinic.= Subject: tuberculosis. Chicago
 Tuberculosis Institute. 1919.

 =Indiana. Traveling Auto Exhibit.= Subject: prevention of
 tuberculosis. Indiana Society for the Prevention of Tuberculosis.
 1917. Truck fitted with screen and machine for moving picture shows;
 also lectures with stereopticon and exhibits.

 =Louisiana. Sanitary Truck.= Subject: personal hygiene and disease
 prevention among Negroes. Louisiana State Board of Health. 1919.
 Lectures, exhibits, and motion pictures.

 =Maryland. Public Health Car.= Subject: educational and organization
 work. Maryland Tuberculosis Association. 1916. Motion pictures,
 lectures, and distribution of literature.

 =Massachusetts. Child Welfare Truck.= Division of Hygiene, State
 Department of Public Health. Lectures, demonstrations, exhibits on all
 phases of child welfare.

 =Mississippi. Rural Dispensary Truck.= Subject: education in general
 health and tuberculosis. Bureau of Tuberculosis, State Sanatorium
 of the Board of Health of Mississippi. 1919--continuous. Motion
 picture and stereopticon shows, lectures, exhibits, examinations, and
 distribution of literature.

 =New York. Healthmobile.= Subject: general health propaganda. State
 Department of Health. 1919. Lectures and motion pictures.

  =Dental Education Car.= Subject: dental instruction and dispensary
  service. Nassau County school authorities and Junior Red Cross. 1920.
  Ford truck equipped with necessary dental supplies and equipment.

 =North Carolina. Moving Picture Health Car.= State Board of Health.
 1916. Lectures and motion pictures.

  =Health Education Car.= Subject: tuberculosis and mouth hygiene.
  State Board of Health and State Tuberculosis Association. 1920. Truck
  equipped with lighting system and motion picture machine. Lectures
  and moving picture shows in the forty-five counties of the state.

 =Ohio. Cleveland Children’s Year Special.= Subject: dispensary for
 child hygiene and welfare work. Children’s Year Committee of Council
 of Defense. 1918. Exhibits, examinations of children, motion picture
 shows, and distribution of literature.

 =Washington. Clinic and Exhibit Truck.= Subject: tuberculosis
 diagnosis and education. Truck for transportation of clinic staff
 and exhibit; clinic held in public halls. Washington Tuberculosis
 Association. 1919. Lectures, exhibits, and clinic.

 =West Virginia. Rural Tuberculosis Campaign.= Subject: prevention
 and cure of tuberculosis, and extermination of flies. West Virginia
 Tuberculosis League. 1917. Automobile tour in charge of a woman
 physician and her assistant. Stereopticon show and lectures; also
 first aid demonstration.

 =Wisconsin. Health Wagon.= Subject: health preservation and disease
 prevention. Wisconsin Anti-Tuberculosis Association. 1916. Motion
 pictures and lectures.


MOTOR TRANSPORTATION DEVELOPMENT TOURS

 =United States. Transcontinental Tour.= Subject: recruiting for Motor
 Transport Corps, and education regarding good roads. Motor Transport
 Corps, War Department. 1919. Fleet of motor trucks and passenger
 vehicles from the Capitol to San Francisco over the Lincoln Highway.
 Exhibits, demonstrations, and lectures, with moving picture shows.

 =Georgia. Motor Truck Trains.= Subject: quicker transportation
 facilities between farms and markets. Macon Chamber of Commerce. 1919.
 One hundred and four trucks were divided into four trains; each toured
 the country routes for a radius of 100 miles. Merchandise carried on
 out-going trips and farm produce on return trips.

 =Illinois. Motor Trucks.= Subject: uses of motor vehicles on farms.
 National Association of Motor Truck Sales Managers. 1919. These
 trucks toured six states and covered over 3,000 miles.

 =Missouri. St. Louis Motor Truck Expedition.= Subject: farm uses of
 motor-driven vehicles. 1919. Sixteen motor companies co-operated, and
 the tour covered sections of the north central states.

 =New York. Rural Motor Truck Express.= Subject: uses of motor-driven
 vehicles on farms and for express delivery. National Automobile
 Chamber of Commerce co-operated with New York State Department of
 Farms and Markets. 1919. Demonstration given at State Fair, Syracuse,
 September, 1919.


MISCELLANEOUS TOPICS--TRUCKS

 =England. Cine-Motor Touring Movies.= Subject: information relating
 to war activities shown in rural districts. British Ministry of
 Information. 1918.

 =United States. Mine Rescue Auto Trucks.= Subject: instruction of
 miners in first aid and use of oxygen breathing apparatus, and
 to render assistance in case of mine disaster. Bureau of Mines,
 Department of the Interior. 1913; continuous service since then. Six
 such trucks used by Bureau in mining districts. See Mine Rescue Cars.

 =Connecticut. Victory Conference.= Subject: women’s war work. Woman’s
 Committee, State Council of Defense. 1918. Exhibits, demonstrations,
 and lectures.

 =Georgia. Motion Picture Trucks.= Subject: Red Cross activities.
 Southern Division, American Red Cross. Georgia and Tennessee. 1918.
 Lectures with motion pictures.

 =Maryland. Motion Picture Truck.= Subject: Red Cross activities
 overseas and in America. Potomac Division, American Red Cross,
 Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia. 1919. Two lecture and exhibit
 trucks.

 =New York. Victory Trucks.= Subject: reconstruction and post-war
 service. Reconstruction Commission of the State of New York,
 co-operating with the Bureau of Commercial Economics. 1919. One motion
 picture truck.

  =Motor Trucks.= Subject: go-to-church propaganda. Erie Annual
  Conference of Methodist Episcopal Church. Two hundred and twenty
  automobiles toured the state and Pennsylvania in an effort to get
  people to attend church more often.

 =North Carolina. Motion Picture Truck.= Subject: community welfare.
 1919; continuous. State Bureau of Community Service. Semi-monthly tour
 of truck to rural districts for motion pictures and lecture programs
 and community organization.

 =Pennsylvania. Motor Trucks.= See New York.

 =Tennessee. Motion Picture Trucks.= See Georgia.

 =Virginia. Motion Picture Truck.= See Maryland.

 =West Virginia. Motion Picture Truck.= See Maryland.


MISCELLANEOUS VEHICLES USED FOR TOURS

 =Canada--Motorcycle. Animal Treatment Cars.= Subject: encouragement
 of humane treatment of dumb animals. Toronto Humane Society. 1914.
 Continuous service since then.

 =California--House-boat. “The Josephine.”= Subject: exhibits of animal
 parasites and working field laboratory. State Board of Health. 1919.

 =Massachusetts--Trolley Car. Child Welfare and Food Conservation
 Car.= Women’s Committee, Council of National Defense. 1918. Exhibits,
 lectures, and demonstrations.

 =Michigan--Trolley Car. Children’s Year Special.= Woman’s Committee,
 Michigan Division of the Council of National Defense. 1918. Car
 divided into three sections for exhibits, examinations, lectures, and
 demonstrations.

 =Vermont--Wagon. Health Exhibit Wagon.= State Board of Health. 1913.
 Horse-drawn vehicle used for moving pictures and health exhibits.

 =Wisconsin--Motorcycle. “Flying Squadron of Health.”= Subject:
 propaganda for tuberculosis prevention and cure. Wisconsin
 Anti-Tuberculosis Association. 1911-1915. Exhibits, stereopticon
 slides, and lectures.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


The amount of printed matter bearing on the use of trains, trucks,
and trolley cars in educational campaigns is not very large. The list
below is fairly representative of the material available, most of it
being in the form of articles and illustrations in magazines and other
periodicals.

 =Agricultural Train.= Biennial Report, 1912-13, Department of
 Agriculture, Labor and Statistics, Frankfort, Kentucky, pp. 48-56.
 Five illustrations of train and exhibits.

 =Apple Packing Train, The.= F. S. Welsh. New York State Agricultural
 Department Bulletin, January, 1916, vol. 79, pp. 679-83. Description
 of Apple Packing Train of New York Central Railroad and State
 Department of Agriculture. Two illustrations of demonstrators.

 =Auto-Stereopticon and Moving Picture Machine For Extension Service in
 Rural Schools.= Louisiana State University Bulletin, July 1915. Nine
 illustrations of car for showing motion pictures at school houses,
 audience at lecture, and details of picture machine.

 =Better Farming Special, A.= C. T. Rice. Hoard’s Dairyman, January
 28, 1916, vol. 51, p. 4. Description of Norfolk and Western Railway’s
 Better Farming Special. One illustration of exterior of train.

 =Better Farming Train, The.= A. M. Shaw. Agricultural Gazette of
 Canada, October, 1916, pp. 909-13. Description of train and tour of
 Canada’s Better Farming Train. Three illustrations of exterior and
 interior of train.

 =Child Welfare Special, The.= Janet Geister. Institution Quarterly,
 Springfield, Illinois, December 31, 1919, pp. 120-25. Description of
 Child Welfare Special of Children’s Bureau and its tour.

 =Cine-Motor Touring Movies Equipment of the British Government.= F.
 A. Talbot. Scientific American, August 3, 1918, vol. 119, p. 93. Two
 illustrations of a truck used for moving picture projection of films
 giving war information in rural districts.

 =Cleaning Up a State.= Henry Oyen. World’s Work, March 1912, pp.
 510-21. Map and several illustrations of Health Exhibit Train of
 Louisiana State Board of Health.

 =Dairy Instruction Car.= Agricultural Gazette of Canada, May, 1916, p.
 449. Description of Canada’s Special Dairy Car.

 =Educating the Farmers by Rail.= H. A. Crafts. Scientific American,
 May 21, 1910, vol. 102, pp. 420-21. Description of California’s
 Agricultural and Horticultural Train.

 =Egg and Poultry Demonstration Car Work in Reducing Our $50,000,000
 Waste in Eggs.= W. E. Pennington, H. C. Pierce, and H. L. Schroeder.
 U. S. Agricultural Department Year Book, 1914, pp. 363-80. Two
 illustrations of interior of car. See also Scientific American
 Supplement, May 6, 1916, vol. 81, pp. 292-93, for illustration of a
 specimen chart used in lecture work.

 =Farming by Special Train.= Clifford V. Gregory. Outlook, April 22,
 1911, vol. 97, pp. 913-22. Eleven illustrations of interior and
 exterior of cars and audiences. Several trains mentioned.

 =For Better Roads.= Worth C. Harder. Harper’s Weekly, September 14,
 1912, p. 15. Two illustrations of Good Roads Special Train.

 =Good Seed, The Gospel of.= House Beautiful, July 1913, vol. 34, p.
 49. Editorial comment on several good seed trains in the Dakotas,
 Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa.

 =Gospel of Health on Wheels.= World’s Work, May 1911, vol. 22, pp.
 14-313-14. Description of Louisiana Health Train.

 =Health Exhibit Car, A Week on a.= Eugene Kerner. Journal of the
 Outdoor Life, September 1912, vol. 9, pp. 210-11. Kentucky’s health
 train.

 =Health on Wheels.= Agnes Morris. American City, December 1914, vol.
 11, pp. 453-56. Three interior and one double-page illustration of
 exterior of Health Exhibit Train of Louisiana State Board of Health.

 =Health on Wheels.= Louisiana State Board of Health, New Orleans, La.,
 Oct. 31, 1914. Thirteen illustrations of train, exhibits, and director
 of tour of Health Exhibit Train of Louisiana State Board of Health.

 =Health to Sell.= Samuel Hopkins Adams. La Follette’s Magazine,
 December 1914, pp. 8, 9. Mention of “Flying Squadron of Health,” a
 motorcycle tour of the Wisconsin Anti-Tuberculosis Association. One
 illustration.

 =Hessian Fly Train.= George D. Dean. Journal of Economic Entomology,
 February 1916, vol. 9, pp. 139-41. Train to instruct farmers in
 ridding Kansas of insect pests. Three illustrations of train.

 =Homemaking on Wheels.= Country Gentleman, February 12, 1916, vol.
 81, p. 366. Demonstration car of the Household Science Department,
 University of Illinois. Three illustrations of interior of car.

 =Instruction of the Public in Anti-Tuberculosis Measures by a
 Traveling Car Exhibit.= George Homan, M.D. Journal of the American
 Medical Association, September 24, 1910, Vol. 55, pp. 1072-73. One
 interior and one exterior illustration.

 =Iowa Dairy Special, The 16th.= E. S. Estel. Kimball’s Dairy Farmer,
 July 1, 1916, vol. 14, p. 428. Description and comparison of dairy
 trains run in Iowa. Two illustrations of demonstrators, lecturers on
 rear platform of train and of crowd attending an outdoor lecture.

 =Kentucky Wakes Up.= Roy L. French. Journal of the Outdoor Life,
 February 1915, vol. 12, pp. 45-46. Tuberculosis exhibit car; 1
 illustration of interior.

 =Land Clearing Demonstration.= A. W. Hopkins. Hoard’s Dairyman, May
 12, 1916, vol. 51, p. 661. Description of Stump Pulling Special in
 Wisconsin.

 =Motor Trucks and Movies to Help Save Rural Children.= American City,
 Town and County Edition, September 1919, vol. 21, p. 227. Description
 of Child Welfare Special of Children’s Bureau. Two illustrations of
 truck.

 =Moving School of Food Conservation.= Survey, January 5, 1918, p. 401.
 Brief mention of Pennsylvania Food Train. One illustration on cover.

 =New Features in the Anti-Tuberculosis Campaign.= Bulletin No. 3, vol.
 13, March 1, 1913, pp. 71-75. Vermont State Board of Health. Three
 illustrations.

 =On the Exhibition Car in Ontario.= J. R. Dickson, B.A., M.S.F.
 Canadian Forestry Journal, November 1919, pp. 464-65.

 =Poultry Demonstration Trains Are Popular.= Helen Dow Whitaker.
 Reliable Poultry Journal, August, 1917, vol. 24, pp. 504-05.
 Description of Washington’s Food Preparedness Campaign Train. One
 illustration of exterior of train and one illustration of interior.

 =Public Activities of New York State to be Shown in Free Motion
 Pictures.= American City, City Edition, October 1919, vol. 21, p. 318.
 Brief mention of trucks to be used by Reconstruction Commission of New
 York State in showing motion pictures of every city and town in the
 state.

 =Railroading Knowledge to the Farmer.= Owen Wilson. World’s Work,
 November 1911, vol. 23, pp. 100-06. Ten illustrations of various
 trains mentioned in article.

 =Railroads Co-operating with Farmers.= Harper’s Weekly, February 5,
 1910, p. 31. Several trains mentioned; one illustration.

 =Railway School for Farmers.= H. A. Crafts. Scientific American, April
 30, 1910. Three illustrations of interior and one of exterior of train
 without description.

 =Report of the Child Welfare Department, Connecticut State Council
 of Defense.= May 1, 1919. Brief mention on page 9, and double-page
 illustration of Baby Special.

 =Safety First.= Scientific American, June 10, 1916, vol. 114, p. 616.
 Description of tour of United States Government Safety First Train.
 Four illustrations of train.

 =Safety First Special.= Outlook, May 31, 1916, vol. 113, pp. 240, 261.
 Description of tour of United States Government Safety First Train.
 Two illustrations of train.

 =Sending College to the Farmer.= W. T. Clarke. Sunset, April 1913,
 vol. 30, pp. 383-89. Three illustrations of exterior of car and one
 of crowd attending exhibit. Agricultural and horticultural train in
 California.

 =Special Dairy Car, The.= K. G. Mackay. Hoard’s Dairyman, May 12,
 1916, vol. 51, p. 666. Brief description of the Special Dairy Car in
 Saskatchewan, Canada.

 =Special Peach Culture Train to Cover Arkansas.= Arkansas Homestead,
 November 25, 1918, pp. 5, 11. Special train ran in Arkansas in 1918.

 =Teaching Good Roads by Special Train.= Robert Franklin. Technical
 World, June 1912, pp. 448-51. Five illustrations. Frisco Railway’s
 Good Roads Special.

 =Teaching Health by Motion Pictures.= Warren H. Brooker, C.E. Health
 Bulletin, North Carolina State Board of Health, No. 2, vol. 31, of May
 1916. How Public Health is Being Taught in Rural Districts by Means
 of Traveling Motion Pictures. Two illustrations of car and one of
 audience.

 =The University on Wheels.= Agnes C. Laut. Colliers, September 10,
 1910, vol. 45, p. 16. The Corn and Wheat Evangelists of the Middle
 West and the Special Trains of Instruction. Several trains mentioned,
 and three illustrations of cars.

 =Touring a State with Motion Pictures.= Arthur J. Strawson. Journal
 of the Outdoor Life, October 1917, pp. 304-05. Three illustrations of
 Indiana Society for Prevention of Tuberculosis truck.

 =Traveling Baby Clinic.= Conservation of Life, July 1919, pp. 60-62.
 Ottawa, Canada. Trucks used for baby welfare. Two illustrations.

 =Traveling Dispensaries for Italy.= The Public Health Nurse, November
 1918, pp. 261-62. Three illustrations of trucks used for dental and
 baby saving purposes.

 =Unique Traveling Safety Exhibit.= New York Central Magazine, August
 1919, p. 21. Brief mention of Safety First Exhibit Car of New York
 Central Lines. Two illustrations of interior of moving picture and
 exhibit car.

 =Western Railways and Farming.= J. R. Wilson. Nation, November 10,
 1910, vol. 91, p. 441. Letter commenting on several trains run in
 western states.




INDEX


ADAMS, S. H.: description of health motorcycle tour by, 34-37

ADVANCE AGENTS: qualifications, 49;
  preliminary work for, 50-52.
  See also _Committees_

ADVANCE WORK: publicity and organization, 42-65;
  local co-operation, 45-54;
  committees, 55-65, 98;
  follow-up program, 114

ADVANTAGES: economical, 4;
  publicity, 4;
  of stimulating audiences, 5, 104;
  of striking features, 6;
  trains versus trucks, 10-11

ADVERTISING: mediums, and purpose of, 43;
  committee on newspapers, 56;
  posters, 57;
  window displays, 57;
  slides, 57, 58;
  through local merchants, 58;
  Hollingworth on, 107;
  exhibit car, 122

AGRICULTURE: promoting interest in, 5;
  Peach Demonstration Train, and illustration of exhibits, 13-14;
  account of dairy train in Illinois, 15-16;
  Pure Seed and Home Power Special, 16;
  canning trucks, 37-39;
  train titles, 67;
  program for exhibit train, 74-75;
  list of tours, 118-127, 129-130;
  bibliography, 137-142

ALABAMA: publicity tours, train equipment, 129

APPEALS: advance publicity work, 42-52;
  to local committees, 52-65

ARKANSAS: conservation train tour, 118;
  bibliography, 141

ATTENDANCE: novel devices attract, 7, 34;
  advance work to secure, 42-45;
  methods of distributing, 44, 75-77;
  outdoors, 77;
  planning for, 94, 98;
  receiving visitors, 97-99;
  estimating numbers, 100;
  distributing, 101-104

ATTRACTIVE EXHIBITS: advantages and suggestions, 4;
  novel features a stimulus, 5-7, 104;
  healthmobile, opposite 10.
  See also _Motion Pictures_

AUDIENCES: selection and visualization of, 69.
  See also _Attendance_

AUTOMOBILES: motion picture tours, 9, 25-26;
  dispensaries and clinics, 27-33;
  Child Welfare Specials, 30-34;
  speaking tours, 34-37;
  government trucks, 37-41;
  motor service, 65;
  list of truck tours, by states, 129-136;
  and go-to-church propaganda, 135;
  bibliography, 137.
  See also _Trucks_


BIBLIOGRAPHY, 137-142


CALIFORNIA: publicity tours, equipment for, 119, 127, 135;
  bibliography, 138, 141

CANADA: description of forestry car, 90-92, 128;
  publicity tours, 128, 129, 131, 135;
  bibliography, 137, 138, 140, 142

CANNING TRUCK: purpose of portable kitchen, 37-39;
  truck tour, 130

CHILDREN’S YEAR SPECIAL: in Michigan, 23;
  Cleveland Department of Health, 27-29;
  “skip stops,” 97;
  follow-up work, 113;
  publicity tour, 132, 135

CHILD WELFARE: in Michigan, 23;
  Massachusetts, 24;
  traveling dispensaries and clinics, 27-34;
  U. S. Children’s Bureau truck tour, 30-33;
  advance publicity, 51;
  follow-up work, 113-114;
  health tours and publicity, 127, 131, 132, 135;
  bibliography, 138, 141, 142

CHURCHES: co-operation helpful, 61;
  truck tours in New York and Pennsylvania, 135

CLARK, E. A.: describes successful tour of dairy train, 15-16

CLINICS: and traveling trucks, 27-31;
  Tuberculosis Commission, 28, 30;
  transport truck tour, 133

COLE, P. T.: on Peach Demonstration Train, 14

COMMITTEES: on co-operation, 44, 45-47;
  advance publicity, 52-54;
  reception, 55;
  newspaper, 56;
  advertising, 57-58;
  special delegations, 59-60;
  church co-operation, 61;
  schools, 62;
  foreign groups, 63;
  speakers, 64;
  personal canvass, 64-65;
  reception, 98;
  organizing local, 111-112

CONNECTICUT: publicity tours, train equipment, 131, 134;
  bibliography, 141

CO-OPERATION: value of, 18, 19, 117;
  and publicity, 40-41;
  arrangements for local committees, 44, 45-65, 98, 111;
  churches, 61;
  schools, 62;
  railroads, 117

COST: economical advantages of train or truck, 4;
  budget estimates, 9-10;
  record of Pennsylvania train tour, 9;
  automobile tour in Maryland, 9


DAIRY TRAINS: tour described by E. A. Clark, of Illinois, 15-16;
  list of tours, 118-125;
  bibliography, 137, 139, 141.
  See also _Agriculture_

DEAN, GEORGE A.: describes Hessian Fly Special, 17-20, 139

DELEGATIONS: advance plans for special groups, 59-60, 102;
  from churches, 60, 61;
  schools, 60, 62;
  hotels and restaurants, 60;
  food dealers, 60;
  employes, 60;
  clubs, 60;
  children and teachers, 102

DEMONSTRATIONS: effectiveness of initial presentation, 5-7;
  adaptability of trains for, 10, 11;
  trucks, 11;
  Peach Special, 14;
  dairy train and milking machine, 15-16;
  food conservation, 22, 24, 37, 52;
  canning kitchens, 37-38;
  Land Clearing Special, 52;
  program outlined, 74-76;
  types of cars adapted to, 78-79;
  kitchen illustrated, opposite 92;
  arrangement of car for, 92-93;
  tours, and equipment, 122, 124, 126, 129, 130, 133;
  publications, 140

DICKSON, J. R.: describes forestry car, 90-92, 140

DISPENSARIES: scope of service, 27-33;
  Children’s Year Special of Cleveland, 28-30;
  motor trucks in Italy, 30;
  Children’s Bureau government truck, 30-33;
  publication on, 142

DOWLING, OSCAR: health train pioneer, 20


ECONOMY: advantages of train and truck, 4;
  records of tours, 9-10;
  war propaganda, 21-23

EDUCATION: advantages of tours, 3-8, 11, 25, 27, 117;
  campaign tours, 118-136;
  bibliography, 137-142

ENGLAND: publicity tours, 134;
  bibliography, 138

ENTOMOLOGY: and Hessian fly in Kansas, 18-19

EXHIBIT CARS: peach industry, 13-14;
  dairy train, 15;
  pure seed, 16;
  health tours, 20-21;
  government specials, 22-24, opposite 70 and 77;
  various types, 78-79;
  correct designs for, 79;
  living accommodations, 80;
  cleaning methods, 80-81;
  form and content of exhibits, 81-83;
  moving audiences, 84, 86;
  correct arrangement of interiors, 85, opposite 86 and 87;
  placing exhibits, 87-90;
  description of Canadian forestry car, 90-92;
  moving people through, 99;
  explainers for, 104-105;
  list of, by states, 118-136

EXPENSES: See _Cost_

EXPLAINERS: services of, 104-105


FLAT CARS: dairy trains, 15-16;
  for conservation work, 22, 77, 79, opposite 80;
  Land Clearing Specials, 126, 127;
  recruiting, 129

FLORIDA: publicity tours, and equipment, 120, 127

FOLLOW-UP WORK: and careful planning, 8;
  reception committees valuable, 98;
  aims, and suggestions for efficient, 106-114;
  fixing impressions, 107;
  printed matter, 109-110;
  local organizations to take part, 111-113;
  of West Virginia Public Health Council, 112;
  results, method of checking, 113;
  criticisms, 114

FOOD CONSERVATION TRAINS: government tours, 21-24;
  and child welfare, 23, 24;
  canning kitchens, 37-38;
  work assignments, 52, 54, 61, 65;
  illustration of exhibit car, N. Y. College of Agriculture,
 opposite 86;
  demonstration kitchen illustrated, opposite 92;
  list of tours, 118, 123, 125, 130;
  bibliography, 138, 140

FRANCE: truck tours for health purposes, 131


GEORGIA: Land Clearing Special, advance work, 52;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 120, 133, 134

GOOD ROADS SPECIAL: publicity tours, train equipment, 119, 126, 133;
  bibliography, 138, 141


HALLIDAY, J. D.: health education tours planned and directed by, 28

HEALTH CARS: advance publicity in West Virginia, 46-48;
  topics and exhibits presented, 68;
  over-crowded exhibits, 82;
  methods to attract attention, 82, 83;
  report of follow-up work, 112;
  list of tours, 127, 128, 131-133, 136;
  bibliography, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142

HEALTH EXHIBITS: motion picture truck of N. Y. State, opposite 10;
  health trains in Louisiana, 20;
  child welfare in Kansas, 21;
  West Virginia Health Special, 21;
  purpose of government train, 23;
  Children’s Year Special, 23;
  variety of topics, 68;
  train tours, 127-128;
  truck tours, 131-133;
  wagon tour, 136;
  motorcycle tour, 136;
  bibliography, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142

HEALTHMOBILE: of N. Y. State, opposite 10;
  motion picture tour in North Carolina, 26;
  publicity tour of, 132

HESSIAN FLY SPECIAL: description of train run in Kansas, 17-20, 139;
  speakers and publicity, 18-19;
  train equipment, 122

HOLLINGWORTH, H. L.: on Advertising and Selling, 107

HOME POWER SPECIAL: demonstration of conveniences, 16


ILLINOIS: tour of dairy train in, 15-16;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 120, 131, 133;
  bibliography, 138, 139

ILLUSTRATIONS: opposite 10, 14, 20, 28, 29, 30, 31, 38, 39, 44, 70, 76,
 77, 80, 84, 85, 86, 87, 92

INDIANA: publicity tours, train equipment, 121, 131;
  bibliography, 142

INFORMATION SOURCES: 2, 117

IOWA: publicity tours, train equipment, 122;
  bibliography, 139

ITALY: health trucks, 28, 30, 131;
  motor clinics, 30;
  publicity tours, 131

ITINERARY: planning, 94-97.
  See also _Tours_


KANSAS: Hessian fly train described, 17-20, 122;
  State Agricultural College co-operates with railroad, 17, 18;
  publicity tours, 127;
  bibliography, 139

KENTUCKY: publicity tours, train equipment, 122, 127;
  bibliography, 137, 139, 140


LAND CLEARING: demonstration work, with automobiles, 52;
  publicity tours, 120, 126-127;
  bibliography, 140

LINCOLN HIGHWAY ASSOCIATION: and transcontinental tour, 40-41, 133

LOUISIANA: success of health trains, 20;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 120, 127, 129, 131;
  bibliography, 137, 139


MARYLAND: cost of automobile tour, 9;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 122, 132, 134

MASSACHUSETTS: child welfare tours, 24;
  publicity tours, 130, 132, 135

MEMORY: impressions, and follow-up work, 107-109

MESSAGE, PREPARATION OF: 66-73;
  choosing a topic, 67-70;
  limiting the message, 69;
  program planning, 71-77

MICHIGAN: Children’s Year Special, 23;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 122, 135

MINNESOTA: publicity tours, train equipment, 122

MISSISSIPPI: publicity tours, train equipment, 123, 132

MISSOURI: Women’s Patriotic Special, 22;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 123, 128, 134

MOTION PICTURES: cost of automobile tour, 9;
  N. Y. State healthmobile, opposite 10;
  truck tours, 25-41;
  North Carolina health campaign, 26;
  Children’s Special of Cleveland, 28;
  Wisconsin Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 37;
  advance publicity, and slides, 57-58;
  state tours using, 124, 128, 129, 130, 131-135;
  bibliography, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142

MOTORCYCLES: description of a “Knight of Health,” 34-37, 139;
  tours in Canada and Wisconsin, 135, 136

MOTOR TRANSPORT CORPS: purpose and description of transcontinental
 train, 39-41;
  publicity tours, 133

MOTOR VEHICLES: See _Trucks_

MOVING AUDIENCES: displaying exhibits to, 84, 86


NEBRASKA: publicity tours, train equipment, 123

NEVADA: publicity tours, train equipment, 123

NEW JERSEY: publicity tours, train equipment, 123

NEWSPAPERS: advance publicity for, 56, 58.
  See also _Publicity_

NEW YORK: healthmobile, opposite 10;
  food conservation train, 22;
  publicity tours, and equipment, 123, 129, 132, 134, 135;
  bibliography, 137, 140

NORTH CAROLINA: Board of Health motion picture tour, 26;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 124, 132, 135;
  bibliography, 141

NOVEL PRESENTATION: advantages of, 4-7;
  secures publicity, 6;
  motion picture trucks 25-28;
  “Motorcycle Knight of Health,” 34-37;
  along Lincoln Highway, 40-41


OHIO: Children’s Year Special of Cleveland, 27-30;
  illustrations and trucks, 28-29;
  publicity tours, 130, 132

ORGANIZATION: advance publicity important, 42-65;
  assignments for committees, 52-65;
  report of follow-up work, 112-113

OUTDOOR SPEAKING: 16, 34, 75, 77


PEACH DEMONSTRATION TRAIN: description, and illustration of exhibit
 car, 13-14;
  advance publicity, 48;
  state tours, 118, 125

PENNSYLVANIA: cost of tour in, 9;
  food conservation train, 22;
  canning kitchen of Allegheny County Council, 37-39;
  advance assignments for committees, 53;
  publicity tours, 125, 130;
  bibliography, 140

PERMANENCE: of activities, 5;
  organization and follow-up work, 111-114

PLACES VISITED: planning an itinerary, 94-96

POSTERS: type of agricultural, 43;
  advertising committees, 57

PROGRAMS: choice of a topic, 66, 67-70;
  form of presentation, 67-71;
  unit programs, 71-72;
  of exhibit trains, 73-75;
  of demonstration and exhibit, 76;
  advice in planning, 94-96, 101-104

PUBLICITY: advantages of tours, 4;
  first impression valuable, 7;
  and successful co-operation, 19;
  advance work important, 40, 42-65;
  advertisements, 43;
  specialized appeal, 44;
  committees, co-operation of, 45;
  preparation of letters, and example, 46-48;
  advance agents, duties of, 49-52;
  assignments, features of, 53, 54;
  reception committee, 55;
  committee on newspapers, 56;
  advertising committee, 57;
  committee on special delegations, 59-60;
  church co-operation, 61;
  schools, 62;
  foreign language groups, 63;
  speakers, 64;
  committee on personal canvass, 65; and
  follow-up work, 109-114.
  See also _Advertising_

PURE SEED SPECIAL: home power equipment, 16;
  arrangement of exhibits, opposite 87;
  exhibit trains, 124, 126;
  “Gospel of Good Seed,” 138

PURPOSE: and advantages, 3-4, 117;
  of Motor Transport Corps tour, 39-40


RAILROADS: co-operation of, and list of educational tours, 117-129;
  bibliography, 137-140, 142.
  See also _Trains_

RECEPTION COMMITTEES: advance assignments for, 55, 98

RELAXATION: staff members need, 103, 105

RHODE ISLAND: publicity tours, train equipment, 130


SAFETY FIRST TRAINS: publicity tours, 128, 129;
  bibliography, 141, 142

SCHEDULE: train stops discussed, 94, 96-97;
  work and rest periods, 103-105

SCHOOLS: co-operation, 62;
  attendance of children, and management, 102;
  car as model school room, 128, 129;
  and dental education, 132;
  of conservation, 140

“SKIP STOPS,” 97

SPEAKERS: attraction of prominent, 6;
  short talks in lecture coaches, 15;
  outdoor lectures, 16, 77;
  Hessian Fly Special, 18-19;
  health talks and child welfare, 21, 24;
  advance work for committees on, 64;
  chief factors of success, 73, 74, 75;
  explainers, 104

STAFF MEMBERS: traveling accommodations, 80;
  provision for rest and comfort, 103, 105


TENNESSEE: publicity tours, train equipment, 125

TEXAS: Peach Special, 13-14;
  agricultural train program, 74-75;
  publicity tours, 125

THEATERS. See _Motion Pictures_

TOPICS: selection of, 67-68;
  presentation, 68-71

TOURS: factors in planning, 94-105;
  time stops, 96-97;
  “skip-stops,” 97;
  list of traveling campaigns, 117-136

TRAINS: advantages of tours by, 4-8, 11;
  campaign costs, 9;
  agricultural campaigns, 13-19;
  health tours, 20-21;
  trolleys, 23;
  child welfare, 24;
  planning an itinerary, 94-97;
  moving visitors through, 99;
  list of agricultural, 118-127;
  list of food conservation, 123, 125;
  list of health specials, 127-128;
  safety first trains, 128, 129;
  safety first tours, 128, 129;
  bibliography, 137-141

TRANSCONTINENTAL TOURS: purposes, 39-40;
  Lincoln Highway Association co-operates, 40-41;
  train equipment, 133

TROLLEY TOURS: child welfare, 23-24, 135

TRUCKS: advantages of tours by, 4, 5, 6-8, 11;
  cost of tours, 9;
  adaptability, 11, 25;
  North Carolina health car, 26;
  traveling dispensaries, 27-34;
  Children’s Year Special, 27-29;
  clinics in Italy, 30;
  Child Welfare Special, 30-34;
  speaking tours, 34-37;
  canning truck and portable kitchen, 37-39;
  transcontinental tour, War Department, 39-40;
  and Lincoln Highway Association, 40-41;
  planning an itinerary, 94-97;
  list of agricultural, 129-130;
  list of food conservation, 130;
  list of health specials, 131-133;
  motor transport tours, 133-134;
  motion picture tours, 134-135;
  bibliography, 138, 140, 142.
  See also _Automobiles_

TUBERCULOSIS: motor truck clinics in Italy, 30;
  Wisconsin Anti-Tuberculosis Association, 34, 37;
  attention getting device, 82;
  health tours, and publicity, 127, 128, 131, 132, 133, 136;
  bibliography, 139, 140, 141, 142

TYPES OF CARS: for exhibit or demonstration, 78-79


UNITED STATES: Safety First Train, 23;
  Child Welfare Special, 30-33;
  food conservation truck, 37-39;
  transcontinental motor tour, 39-41;
  Lincoln Highway and Transport Corps, 40-41, 133;
  publicity tours, train equipment, 118, 127, 128, 131, 133, 134;
  bibliography, 141

UNIT PROGRAMS: features included, 71-73

UTAH: publicity tours, train equipment, 126


VERMONT: publicity tours, health wagon, 136;
  bibliography, 140

VIRGINIA: publicity tours, train equipment, 126, 129, 130, 134

VISUALIZATION: essential in preparing message and program, 66-72


WASHINGTON: publicity tours, train equipment, 126, 133;
  bibliography, 140

WEST VIRGINIA: example of health publicity letter, 46-48;
  report on follow-up organization work, 112-113;
  publicity tours, 126, 128, 133, 135

WINDOW DISPLAYS: announcements and signs, 57

WISCONSIN: farm methods promoted by College of Agriculture, 16;
  Anti-Tuberculosis Association work, 34, 37;
  publicity tours, 126, 130, 133, 136;
  bibliography, 139, 140




                       SURVEY AND EXHIBIT SERIES

                     EDITED BY SHELBY M. HARRISON


It is recognized in both surveys and exhibits that a standardized
technique has not been fully worked out. Still a beginning has been
made. Enough experience has been accumulated to justify recording
it and putting it at the disposal of those interested. With a view
therefore to increasing the use of investigation in dealing with
current community problems and to making such investigations more
effective, and with a view also to the widespread employment of better
methods of disseminating helpful information, the Survey and Exhibit
Series has been planned.


 =The A B C of Exhibit Planning.= By Evart G. and Mary Swain Routzahn.
 Price, Cloth, $2.00 net.

 =Traveling Publicity Campaigns.= By Mary Swain Routzahn. Price, Cloth,
 $1.50 net.


                    _Other volumes in preparation_

Subscriptions may be entered for the series, new volumes to be sent
when issued. Or upon request announcements of new books in the series
will be sent as books are issued.


                         PUBLICATION DEPARTMENT
                        RUSSELL SAGE FOUNDATION
                    130 E. 22D STREET, NEW YORK CITY





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELING PUBLICITY CAMPAIGNS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


