The Project Gutenberg eBook of Journal of the Waterloo campaign, vol. 1 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Journal of the Waterloo campaign, vol. 1 (of 2)
        kept throughout the campaign of 1815

Author: Cavalié Mercer

Release date: April 16, 2025 [eBook #75872]

Language: English

Original publication: London: William Blackwood & sons, 1870

Credits: Brian Coe, John Campbell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF THE WATERLOO CAMPAIGN, VOL. 1 (OF 2) ***





  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have been
  placed at the end of the book, in front of the catalog.

  The tables in this book are best viewed using a monospace font.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                               JOURNAL

                                OF THE

                          WATERLOO CAMPAIGN




                               JOURNAL

                                OF THE

                          WATERLOO CAMPAIGN

                 KEPT THROUGHOUT THE CAMPAIGN OF 1815


                             BY THE LATE

                        GENERAL CAVALIÉ MERCER

              COMMANDING THE 9TH BRIGADE ROYAL ARTILLERY


                            IN TWO VOLUMES

                               VOL. I.


                      WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS
                         EDINBURGH AND LONDON
                               MDCCCLXX

                _The Right of Translation is reserved_




PREFACE.


This work--the ‘Journal of the Campaign of 1815’--was written by my
father in its present form about forty years ago, from rough notes
jotted down every evening after the scenes and events of the day
were over. It has no pretension to be an account of the military
operations of the war, but merely a diary of the writer’s own
impressions--what he saw and felt while with the army, from the first
landing in Belgium to the final embarkation for England. Of the great
battle, no other description than that of the part taken in it by
his own troop of Horse-Artillery, or those corps in his immediate
vicinity, is given; but from its very nature as a diary, the tedium
of out-quarters, the fatigues of the march, and the hardships of the
bivouac, are made present, as it were, to the reader. My father
having been a very good amateur artist, was much struck, of course,
by new and picturesque scenes, consequently has described them _con
amore_, and in considerable detail. The author himself belonged to
a military race; all his family were either in the army or navy. He
was the second son of General Mercer of the Royal Engineers, who,
after serving on Sir H. Clinton’s staff during the American War of
Independence, was more than twenty years commanding engineer in the
West of England, where his honourable character procured him many
friends. My father (also a general officer at the time of his death)
was born in 1783, and passing as usual through the Military Academy
at Woolwich, obtained a commission in the Royal Artillery at sixteen,
and was sent to Ireland at the time of the Rebellion. In 1808 he went
to the river Plate to join Whitelock’s unfortunate expedition, and
covered the retreat from Buenos Ayres. This proved a most unhappy
affair for him; for having been in South America, he was prevented
from partaking in the glorious campaigns of the Peninsula, and only
saw foreign service again in the campaign of Waterloo. After the
peace, he was placed upon half-pay. In 1824 he was ordered to Canada,
having the brevet rank of major (I should have noticed that at
Waterloo he only held the rank of second captain, although commanding
a troop--Sir Alex. Dickson, whose troop it was, being otherwise
employed). In 1837, being then a lieutenant-colonel, he was again
sent to North America, and commanded the artillery in Nova Scotia
at the time when the Maine boundary-line threatened to terminate in
a war between this country and the United States. He subsequently
commanded the garrison at Dover, after which he retired from active
service, although, being colonel-commandant of the 9th Brigade of
Royal Artillery, he was never placed on the retired list. From that
time to the period of his death, at the advanced age of eighty-five,
he continued to reside at Cowley Cottage, near Exeter.

Another addition to the numerous books which have been published
about Waterloo will hardly seem out of place at a time when the
subject has been revived both here and in France. It would seem
that men’s interest in this great “World Battle” is as strong now
as fifty years ago; and although this little contribution will not
elucidate any of the questions that are agitated, still (as far as
memory serves) it is the first account of the campaign given to the
world by an artillery officer, and may add another stone to the cairn
raised to the glory of the British army and its immortal chief. At
any rate, the surviving veterans of this stirring epoch will rejoice
to go again over the scenes of their younger days; while the lovers
of peace will congratulate themselves on the cessation of such strife
between two noble nations, whose last (and may it continue to be the
last) hostile _rencontre_ took place upon the plain of Waterloo.

                                                    CAVALIÉ A. MERCER.

  TRIPOLI, SYRIA.




CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


  CHAPTER I.

  PAGE

  Preparations for Departure--Reports of Fugitives--Embarkation
  and Departure--The Voyage--Off the Coast--First View of
  Ostend--Aspect of the Coast--Ostend Harbour--Its Dangers--
  Unceremonious Landing of Dragoon Horses,                           1


  CHAPTER II.

  Confusion at Landing--Scene on Shore--Difficulties--Confusion
  on the Beach--A Catastrophe--The Town by Night--Difficulties
  of the March--Night Quarters--A Pleasant Change--Return
  to Ostend--Waiting to Start--Costumes of the Natives--Scenes
  in the Town--A Wreck--Fearful Scene--Impressions of Ostend,       14


  CHAPTER III.

  Change of Scenery--Arrival at Ghistel--Our Quarters there--Again
  on the March--Arrival at Bruges--Our Hotel--First
  Impressions of Bruges--Present and Past--The Stadthouse
  and Cathedral--Mass in the Cathedral--The Worshippers--The
  Ramparts--Dinner,                                                 32


  CHAPTER IV.

  Eccloo--Arrival at Ghent--Our Quarters there--My Host--My
  Quarters--Louis XVIII. and his Court--French Officers--Marshal
  Marmont--French Deserters--Ghent--Street Architecture--The
  Place D’Armes--Flemish Postilions--View
  from the Citadel--The Corn-Market--The Hôtel de Ville--Meat
  and Vegetable Markets--General Order and Cleanliness--A
  Suppressed Monastery--The Cathedral--A Royal
  Mass--Domestic Architecture--An Interior--Comfortable
  Quarters--Numbers of Priests--Costumes--Character of the
  People--Immorality--German and English Cavalry,                   46


  CHAPTER V.

  Again on the March--The Pays de Waes--Lokeren--A Village
  Curé--Dendermonde--My Quarters at St Gille--View from
  my Windows--Kindness of the Natives--A Flemish Farmhouse--
  Fertility of the Land--At Dinner--Our Host--Attachment
  to Napoleon--Peace and War--Flemish Teams--Cattle
  and Sheep--Dendermonde,                                           78


  CHAPTER VI.

  Excursion to Alost--Aspect of the Place--We Lose our
  Way--Again on the Move--Parting with my Hostess--A Last
  Breakfast--On the March--Change of Scenery--Views
  from the Hills--Beauty of the Country--Arrival at
  Strytem--The Château--Our Quarters there--Comfortless
  Prospect--Family Portraits--Choosing our Quarters--A
  Private Chapel--Increasing Comfort--Our Mess-Room--Karl--His
  History--His Acquirements--An Interruption--The
  Maire and his Following--A Garde-Champêtre--A Scene--M.
  L’Adjoint’s Speech--Our Answer to it--I am peremptory--The
  Deputation in a Fright--The Mayor in Safe
  Keeping--Petit Jean--A Sleepless Night,                          100


  CHAPTER VII.

  Occupations at Strytem--Our Fare--The Country round Strytem--
  Beauty of the Scenery--Rich Cultivation--The Flemish
  Farmers--Farming Establishments--Execrable Roads--Drunkenness--
  Frog Concerts--Draining the Moat--Result of the Experiment--The
  Duc de Berri--His Brutality--A Dog-Chase--Disposition of the
  Troops--Visitors from England--The Duc de Berri again--Artillery
  at Waterloo--Our Equipment--Our Organisation,                    138


  CHAPTER VIII.

  My Difficulties--Plundering--The Duke and the Rocket Troop--
  Ride to Ninove--Ninove--The great Monastery--A ruined
  Convent--Liederkerke--Aspect of the Country--A Character--The
  Lord of Gaesbeke--The Château de Gaesbeke--My Reception--The
  Marquis D’Acornati--Interior of the Château: its desolate
  Aspect--The Kitchen--The Grounds: their Beauty--Variety of
  Views--History of the Château--Career of its Owner--His
  Singularities--His Mode of Life--Visits to the Grounds,          163


  CHAPTER IX.

  Visit to Hal--Return to Strytem--Start for Brussels--First View
  of Brussels--Its Internal Aspect--The Park--The Ramparts--The
  Hôtel de Ville--The Cathedral--The Bruxellaises--The
  Allée-Verte--Prince D’Aremberg--A Mistake--Anticipations
  of the Campaign,                                                 194


  CHAPTER X.

  Cavalry Review--The Duc de Berri again--His Unceremonious
  Reception--The Duke and Blucher--Dinner after the Review--
  Strytem again--New Species of Game--Change of Quarters--A
  Death--Visit from our Host--Our Landlord--A Spy--Approaching
  Departure,                                                       212


  CHAPTER XI.

  Order to Advance--Preparations--Farewell to Strytem--On the
  March--News from Brussels--Halt at Enghien--Doubts as
  to my Route--Uncertainties--Braine le Comte--Still without
  Orders--Beauty of the Scenery--We are left alone--Sounds
  of Distant Battle--Pressing on--Nivelle--Excitement in the
  Town--Signs of Battle--Fugitives from the Field--A Wounded
  Highlander--Belgian Gasconading,                                 230


  CHAPTER XII.

  At Quatre Bras--Our Bivouac--Morning after the Battle--Our
  Position--The Battle-Field--Position of the French--
  Skirmishing--An Alarm--The Retreat--Aspect of the Field--A
  Memento of Battle--Alone on the Field--Inactivity of the
  Enemy--Their Advance--Orders and Counter-Orders--Napoleon--A
  Storm--Our Danger--Our Narrow Escape--Our Retreat--Arrival
  at Genappe--The Enemy again--In Action with them--The Rocket
  Brigade--An Eccentric Missile--Panic among the Brunswickers--
  Take up Position--Rejoin the Army--Bivouac for the Night--
  Discomforts--Comfortless Night--Speculations as to the
  Morrow--A Godsend,                                               253


  CHAPTER XIII.

  Morning of Battle--Survey of the Field--Alarm of Battle--
  Commencement of the Battle--Orders at last--Take up Position--
  The Field of Battle--View from our Position--Our
  own Position--We open Fire--Our first Casualty--An Alarmed
  Doctor--Death of Captain Bolton--A Wounded Horse--A Cavalry
  Charge--Our Situation--Advance of Cavalry--Dangerous
  Mistake--New Position--The Brunswickers--Danger of Panic--
  Advance of Cavalry--Their Retreat--Our first Death--
  Skirmishers--Attack Renewed--Effect of our Fire--The Cavalry
  again Repulsed--A Narrow Escape--A third Attack and Repulse--
  The Duke--Heavy Fire--Fearful Losses--Further Escapes--A
  Remonstrance--Our Losses--Victory--Arrival of Prussians--The
  Field by Moonlight--The Prussian Bivouac--Moonlight Thoughts,    291


  CHAPTER XIV.

  Preparing to Move--The Field by Morning--The Wounded--The
  French Wounded--An Ingrate--A Grenadier à Cheval--A
  Welcome Feast--Visitors from Brussels--Visit to Hougoumont--A
  Contrast--Garden of the Château--A Striking
  Oration--A Noble Enemy--A Keepsake--A Recognition--On
  the March--A Comfortable Bivouac--Resume our March--Block
  before Nivelles--Reception in the Town--Aspect of
  the Town--Arrival of Prisoners--We get on at last--Belgic
  Infantry--Our Bivouac--Rejoin the Army--The Greys and
  Highlanders--Aspect of the Country--We Cross the Frontier--Our
  first Night in France,                                           338




JOURNAL

OF THE

WATERLOO CAMPAIGN.




CHAPTER I.


The return of Napoleon from Elba, though a surprise to many, was far
from being so to those who, well aware of his restless disposition,
his insatiable ambition, and the enthusiastic attachment of the
French soldiery to his person and fortunes, had scarcely expected
that he would have remained so long as he actually did without some
new attempt at disturbing the general peace.

The steps taken on this occasion by the different European
Powers--their preparations for a renewal of the bloody scenes so
lately ended--are out of my province. They belong to the historian,
and not to the simple journalist, whose affair it is to confine
himself strictly to those transactions in which he was himself a
participator; or at most to glance at those more general subjects,
merely to give connection to his narrative and make it better
understood.

At the time the news of this extraordinary event arrived, the troop
of horse-artillery which I commanded was stationed at Colchester;
and the reductions necessary to put us on a peace-establishment had
already commenced, when the order arrived for our being immediately
equipped again for foreign service. To do this effectually, another
troop, then in the same barracks, was broken up, and we got the
picked horses of both, thus making it the finest troop in the
service; and such diligence was used, that although our equipment
fell little short of a complete reorganisation, Major Sir A. Fraser,
commanding the horse-artillery in Colchester, was enabled to report
on the third day that the troop was ready to march at a moment’s
warning.

Meantime the town of Colchester (situated as it is on the great road
from Harwich to London) presented a scene of bustle and anxiety
seldom equalled--couriers passing to and fro incessantly, and
numerous travellers, foreign and English, arriving day and night from
the Continent, many travelling in breathless haste, as if fearful,
even here, of Napoleon’s emissaries.

The reports spread by these fugitives were various and contradictory,
as might be expected.

According to some, Louis XVIII. had been arrested in Paris; according
to others, he had sought refuge in the Pays Bas; and again, it was
asserted that his Majesty was at Ostend, awaiting permission to pass
the sea and return to his old and secure quarters in England.

In the midst of all this, on the 8th April, the post brought our
order to march forthwith to Harwich, there to embark for Ostend--an
order received with unfeigned joy by officers and men, all eager to
plunge into danger and bloodshed, all hoping to obtain glory and
distinction.

On the morning of the 9th, the troop paraded at half-past seven
o’clock with as much regularity and as quietly as if only going to
a field-day; not a man either absent or intoxicated, and every part
of the guns and appointments in the most perfect order. At eight,
the hour named in orders, we marched off the parade. The weather was
fine, the scenery, as we skirted the beautiful banks of the Stour,
charming, and the occasion exhilarating.

Near Manningtree we halted a short time to feed our horses, and then,
pursuing our route, arrived at Harwich about three o’clock in the
afternoon. Here we found the transports--the Adventure, Philarea,
and Salus, in which last I embarked--awaiting us; but the tide being
unfavourable, although we immediately commenced operations, we only
succeeded in embarking the horses of one division and those of the
officers; the remainder were therefore put up in the barracks for the
night. As might be expected, the little town of Harwich presented a
most animated spectacle. Its narrow streets of modest houses, with
brick trottoirs, were crowded with soldiers--some, all over dust,
just arrived; some, who had already been a day or two in the place,
comparatively at home, lounging about in undress; others, about to
embark, hurrying along to the beach with baggage and stores; sailors
marketing, or rolling about half-seas-over; country-people bringing
in vegetables and the like, and towns-people idling at their windows,
or in groups at corners of the streets--in short, the usual picture
incident on such occasions.

The morning of the 10th was foggy, which much retarded us, since
it was necessary to embark the horses in flats to be taken off to
the transports, not easily found in the fog. However, by noon all
were on board, and without any serious accident, although a sailor
was somewhat hurt in endeavouring to recover a horse that had fallen
overboard. In the afternoon our guns, carriages, &c., were embarked;
but as the wind blew right into the harbour, the agent would not
attempt to get out, and we adjourned to Mr Bull’s comfortable house
(the Three Cups), there to pass our last evening in England in the
enjoyment of a good dinner, and perhaps for the last time to sleep in
good beds.

About two P.M. on the 11th, a light breeze from the N.W. induced our
agent to get under way, and we repaired on board our respective ships
with every prospect of a good and speedy passage. In this, however,
we were disappointed, for the breeze dying away as the sun went down,
we anchored, by signal, at the harbour’s mouth, just as it got dark.

The evening was splendid. A clear sky studded with myriads of stars
overhead, and below a calm unruffled sea, reflecting on its glassy
surface the lights of the distant town, the low murmuring sounds
from which, and the rippling of the water under the ships’ bows,
were the only interruptions to the solemn stillness that prevailed
after the people had retired to their berths. In our more immediate
neighbourhood stretched out the long, low, sandy tract, on the
seaward extremity of which the dark masses of Landguard fort could
just be distinguished.

With daybreak on the morning of the 12th came a favourable wind,
though light, and again we took up our anchors and proceeded to sea.
For some distance, after clearing the harbour, our course lay along
the Suffolk coast, and so near in that objects on shore were plainly
discernible. To us, who had long been stationed at Woodbridge, only a
few miles inland, this was highly interesting. We knew every village,
every copse, every knoll--nay, almost every tree. There were the
houses in which we had so oft been hospitably entertained; there were
the sheep-walks on which we had so often manœuvred; and there in the
distance, as we passed the mouth of the Deben, our glasses showed us
the very barrack on the hill, with its tiled roofs illumined by the
noontide sun. About Bawdsey we left the coast, and steered straight
over, with a light but favourable wind: the low sandy shores of
Suffolk soon sank beneath the horizon. At noon fell in with a fleet
of colliers bound for the river, and soon after saw the Sunk-Sand
Light; when, as the wind had died away and the tide was setting us
towards the bank, we anchored until the flood-tide. During the night
a light breeze right aft, and smooth water, enabled us to make good
progress; but towards morning (13th) the wind had very considerably
increased, and although the coast was not in sight, we were sensible
of its neighbourhood from the number of curious heavy-looking boats
plying round us in all directions, having the foremast, with its huge
lug-sail, stuck right up in the bow, or rather inclining over it.
From one of these boats we soon procured a pilot--a little sturdy
fellow, with a full, good-humoured countenance, and his breast
decorated with a silver medal bearing the impress of an anchor, like
our porters’ tickets, the badge of his calling.

The poor fellow was hardly on deck ere he was surrounded and assailed
by innumerable questions--“Where is Buonaparte?” “Where is the French
army?” “What are the English about?” “Has there been any fighting?”
&c. &c. Of this he understood or heard only the word “Buonaparte,”
and therefore to all kept repeating, “Il est capôte,” accompanied
by a significant motion of the hand across the throat, at the same
time showing much anxiety to get rid of his tormentors and proceed
to business, which he did with such earnestness as soon gave us to
understand there must be more than ordinary difficulty in entering
the port of Ostend. The first and principal care was the getting up a
hawser and coiling it on deck, the use of which we were soon to learn.

Meanwhile we had been approaching the coast, which, though still
invisible, the pilot informed us was not distant. The first
intimation of the truth of this was the appearance of the church
tower and lofty lighthouse of Ostend; and we had brought about half
their height above the horizon before land began to show itself,
which it did in a number of isolated and rounded yellow hummocks, and
at the same time the houses of the town became distinctly visible.
With that impatience and excessive curiosity always felt upon
approaching for the first time a strange land, especially under the
present interesting state of things, all our glasses were directed
to the coast, which we were rapidly nearing and hoped soon to reach,
when, to our great disappointment, the pilot ordered the vessel to be
hove to, and we found that the tide would not permit our running for
the port before two P.M. Numbers of ships, brigs, and schooners were
lying-to as well as ourselves, and others continually arriving.

Nothing, certainly, could be more repulsive than the appearance
of the coast--sand-hills as far as the eye could reach, broken
only by the grey and lugubrious works and buildings of Ostend, and
further west by the spires of Mittelkerke and Nieuport, peering
above the sand-hills. The day, too, was one little calculated to
enliven the scene. A fresh breeze and cloudy sky; the sea black,
rough, and chilly; the land all under one uniform cold grey tint,
presenting scarcely any relief of light and shadow, consequently
no feature. Upon reconnoitring it, however, closer, we found that
this forbidding exterior was only an outer coating to a lovely gem.
Through the openings between the sand-hills could be seen a rich
level country, of the liveliest verdure, studded with villages and
farms interspersed amongst avenues of trees and small patches of
wood. An occasional gleam of sunshine breaking out and illumining it,
communicated to it a dreamy appearance that was very pleasing, and
tended to revive our spirits, drooping from the gloomy aspect of the
coast.

A black-looking mass of timber rising from the waters off the
entrance of the harbour, and which we understood to be a fort, now
became the principal object of our attention. As the tide rises the
depth of water is announced by different flags hoisted on this fort;
and we were delighted when at last that (a red one) indicating the
necessary depth for our ship was hoisted, and we bore up for the
harbour mouth.

The harbour of Ostend is an artificial one, formed by _jetées_ of
piles projecting as far as low-water mark. The right, on entering,
is merely a row of piles running along in front of the works of the
town; but on the left is a long mole or _jetée_, on the extremity of
which is a small fort. Behind this mole, to the north-east, the shore
curving inwards forms a bight, presenting an extent of flat sandy
beach on which the water is never more than a few feet deep, even at
the highest tides. A tremendous surf breaks on this whenever it blows
from the westward. As the flood-tide sets past the harbour mouth
with great rapidity, a vessel attempting to enter with a westerly
wind is in danger of being swept beyond it and thrown on the beach
just mentioned. And this we now discovered was the cause of the
anxiety displayed by our pilot, and for which we could not before
account. In approaching the harbour, we steered as if going to run
the ship ashore on the broad stone glacis of the town, which extended
into the water all along the sea-front. Even with this precaution
we were drifted so much to leeward that, instead of shooting into
the harbour, we went bump upon the _jetée_.[1] The poor pilot raved
and jumped about like a madman, but there still was method in his
madness; and now we discovered the use of the hawser he had coiled
upon deck, for passing the end of this to the Belgic soldiers, who
upon the shock immediately ran out of their guard-room, the vessel
was saved from swinging round (as she otherwise would have done) and
falling ashore on the beach beyond, stern foremost, and soon dragged
within the influence of the current setting up the harbour.

Our attention, before engaged by our perilous situation, was now
directed to new and exhilarating objects on the other side, where
the works of the town arose immediately from the sands. These were
crowded with spectators, and, being Sunday, all in their best; so
that the sun, just peeping out as we shot along, imparted to the
scene quite an air of gaiety; and to us it was also a novel one. I
remember being mightily struck with the head-dress of the women, so
different from what we had been accustomed to see at home, and the
comparison was certainly not in favour of my fair compatriots. With
these the fashionable coiffure was a large low _poke_-bonnet, which
I had always fancied very becoming; but there is no describing how
this sunk into meanness and deformity in a moment when I cast my
eyes on the elegantly tapering, high-crowned straws of the _belles_
on the rampart, encircled sometimes with two, and even three, rows
of gay ribbon or artificial flowers. These gave them such a lofty
commanding air, and withal was so light and graceful. But bonnets
were not allowed long to occupy my attention. Followed by a crowd of
other craft of all sorts and sizes, we shot rapidly along towards
that part of the harbour where a dense assemblage of shipping filled
up its whole breadth, and forbade further progress, so that one
wondered what was to become of the numerous vessels in our wake.
The mystery was soon explained, for each having attained the point,
turning her prow to the town, ran bump on the sands, and there stuck
fast. Those immediately above us had just arrived, and from them
a regiment of Light Dragoons was in the act of disembarking by
throwing the horses overboard, and then hauling them ashore by a long
rope attached to their head-collars. What a scene! What hallooing,
shouting, vociferating, and plunging! The poor horses did not appear
much gratified by their sudden transition from the warm hold to a
cold bath.




CHAPTER II.


Our keel had scarcely touched the sand ere we were abruptly boarded
by a naval officer (Captain Hill) with a gang of sailors, who, _sans
cérémonie_, instantly commenced hoisting our horses out, and throwing
them, as well as our saddlery, &c., overboard, without ever giving
time for making any disposition to receive or secure the one or the
other. To my remonstrance his answer was, “I can’t help it, sir; the
Duke’s _orders are positive that no delay is to take place in landing
the troops as they arrive, and the ships sent back again; so you must
be out of her before dark_.” It was then about three P.M.; and I
thought this a most uncomfortable arrangement.

The scramble and confusion that ensued baffle all description.
Bundles of harness went over the side in rapid succession, as well
as horses. In vain we urged the loss and damage that must accrue
from such a proceeding. “Can’t help it--no business of mine--Duke’s
orders are positive,” &c. &c., was our only answer. Meantime the
ebb had begun to diminish the depth of water alongside, and enabled
us to send parties overboard and to the beach to collect and carry
our things ashore, as well as to haul and secure the horses. The
same operation commenced from the other vessels as they arrived, and
the bustle and noise were inconceivable. The Dragoons and our men
(some nearly, others quite, naked) were dashing in and out of the
water, struggling with the affrighted horses, or securing their wet
accoutrements as best they could. Some of the former were saddling
their dripping horses, and others mounting and marching off in small
parties. Disconsolate-looking groups of women and children were to be
seen here and there sitting on their poor duds, or roaming about in
search of their husbands, or mayhap of a stray child, all clamouring,
lamenting, and materially increasing the babel-like confusion, amidst
which Erin’s brogue was everywhere predominant. Irish beggars swarm
everywhere and in all quarters of the globe. Even here they pestered
us to death, and one young bare-legged rascal, when he found his
whining and cant unavailing, suddenly changing his tone, tried to
excite our liberality by a dirty joke on the Flemish pronunciation of
their word horse (_pferd_). Add to all this crowds of people from the
town idling about--some as spectators, others watching for windfalls;
some bringing cakes, beer, &c., for sale, others teazing the officers
with various offers of service, and these not always of the most
respectable kind.

It was not without difficulty that I succeeded at last in
impressing upon Captain Hill the necessity of leaving our guns and
ammunition-waggons, &c., on board for the night--otherwise his
furious zeal would have turned all out to stand on the wet sand or
be washed away. Meantime, although we were on shore, we were without
orders what to do next. Not an officer, either of the staff, the
garrison, nor even of our own corps, came near us. Night approached,
and with it bad weather evidently. Our poor shivering horses and
heaps of wet harness could not remain on the sands much longer, when
the flood began to make again; and it was necessary to look about
and see what could be done. With this intent, therefore, leaving the
officers to collect their divisions, I got one of my horses saddled
and rode into the town. Here was the same bustle (although not the
same confusion) as on the sands. The streets were thronged with
British officers, and the quays with guns, waggons, horses, baggage,
&c.

One would hardly expect to meet with any delay in finding the
commandant of a fortress, yet such was my case; and it was not until
after long and repeated inquiry that I discovered Lieutenant-Colonel
Gregory, 44th Regiment, to be that personage, and found his
residence. From him, however, I could obtain nothing. He seemed
hardly to have expected the compliment of reporting our arrival, and
stated that he had no other orders but that the troops of every arm
should march for Ghent the moment they landed, without halting a
single day in Ostend.

Strange to say, neither I nor the Colonel recollected there was
such a person in Ostend as an Assistant-Quartermaster-General, who
should be referred to on such an occasion. Yet this was the case;
and that officer, instead of attending the debarkation of the
troops, or making himself acquainted with the arrivals, kept out
of sight altogether. Baffled at all points, I was returning to the
sands when I met Major Drummond on the Quai Impérial, and related my
story. He had been here some time, and was consequently acquainted
with the locale. His advice was to march to Ghystelle (a village
about six miles from Ostend), and after putting up there for the
night, to return and disembark my guns, &c., in the morning. Whilst
speaking, however, some one (I forget who) came up with the agreeable
information that Ghystelle was already fully occupied by the 16th
Dragoons. He, however, gave me directions for some large sheds about
a mile off, where his own horses has passed the preceding night.
This was some consolation; so riding off immediately to reconnoitre
the place and the road to it, I returned to the beach just as it
got dark; and a most miserable scene of confusion I there found.
Our saddles, harness, baggage, &c., were still strewed about the
sand, and these the flood, which was now making, threatened soon to
submerge. _Pour surcroît de malheur_, the rain came down in torrents,
and a storm, which had been brewing up the whole afternoon, now burst
over us most furiously. The lightning was quite tremendous, whilst
a hurricane, howling horribly through the rigging of the ships, was
only exceeded in noise by the loud explosions and rattling of the
incessant claps of thunder.

Our people, meantime, blinded by the lightning, had borrowed some
lanterns from the ship, and were busily employed searching for the
numerous articles still missing. The obscurity, however, between
the vivid flashes was such that we were only enabled to keep
together by repeatedly calling to each other, and it was not without
difficulty and great watchfulness that we escaped being caught by
the tide, which flowed rapidly in over the flat sands. At length,
having collected as many of our things as was possible, and saddled
our horses (some two or three of which had escaped altogether),
we began our march for the sheds a little after midnight, with a
farrier and another dismounted man carrying lanterns at the head of
our column. The rain continued pouring, but flashes of lightning
occurred now only at intervals, and the more subdued rolling of the
thunder told us that it was passing away in the distance. Our route
lay through the town, to gain which we found some advanced ditch to
be crossed by a very frail wooden bridge. Half the column, perhaps,
might have cleared this, when “crack” down it went, precipitating
all who were on it at the moment into the mud below, and completely
cutting off those in the rear. Here was a dilemma. Ignorant of the
localities, and without a guide, how was the rear of the column to
join us, or how were the people in the ditch, with their horses, to
be extricated? Luckily none were hurt seriously, and the depth was
not great--not more, perhaps, than six or eight feet; but that was
enough to baffle all our attempts at extricating the horses. Some
Belgic soldiers of a neighbouring guard, of which we were not aware,
fortunately heard us, and came to our assistance; and one of them,
crossing the ditch, undertook to guide the rear of our column and
those below to another gate, whilst one accompanied us to the Quai
Impérial, where, after waiting a while, we were at length assembled,
drenched with rain and starving of cold and hunger. The Quai was
silent and dark; the only light gleamed dimly through the wet from a
miserable lamp over the door of a café, in which people were still
moving; and the only sounds that broke the stillness of the quarter
were the splashing of the rain and the clattering of our steel
scabbards and horses’ feet as we moved dejectedly on--winding our way
through unknown avenues (for in the dark I found it impossible to
recognise the narrow streets through which I had so hurriedly passed
in the afternoon), occasionally illuminated by a solitary lamp, the
feeble light of which, however, was somewhat increased by reflection
on the wet pavement. After following for some time this devious
course, I began to fear I had missed the road, when again we stumbled
upon a Belgic guard, by whose direction and guidance we at length
reached the outer barrier. Here we again came to a standstill, the
officer in charge refusing to let us out. Some altercation ensued: I
forget the particulars, but it ended in his opening the gate.

Once clear of the town, we hoped soon to reach our lodging; but had
scarcely advanced a hundred yards ere we found that result was more
distant than we had fancied, and that patience was still requisite.
The rain had rendered the fat soil so slippery that our horses could
scarcely keep their legs, and the road running along the narrow
summit of a dyke, with ditches on each side, rendered precaution and
slow movement imperative. Every moment the fall of some horse impeded
the column; our lanterns went out; and after wandering a considerable
time, we at length ascertained, by knocking up the people at a house
by the wayside, that we had overshot our mark, and it was not until
two in the morning that we succeeded in finding the sheds. These were
immensely long buildings attached to some saw-mills, for what use I
know not, unless to store planks, &c., for they were now empty; but
they were admirably adapted to our purpose, since we could range all
our horses along one side, whilst the men occupied the other, in one
of them. A quantity of hay, and some straw, left by our predecessors,
was a valuable acquisition to man and beast under such circumstances.
All our enjoyments are the effect of contrast. It would be considered
miserable enough to be obliged to pass the night under such equivocal
shelter as these sheds afforded, and that, too, in wet clothes; yet
did we now, after twelve hours of harassing work and exposure to the
weather, look upon them as palaces, and, having cared for our poor
beasts as far as circumstances would permit, proceeded to prepare for
that repose so necessary and so longed for.

I was already ensconced in some hay, when Lieutenant Leathes, who
had been reconnoitring, brought intelligence that the people were
still up in an adjoining miller’s house, and that they were willing
to give us shelter until morning. Thither, therefore, we repaired;
and being ushered into the kitchen, quite a pattern of neatness,
found the good woman and one of her men already busy making a fire
and preparing some coffee for us--unlooked-for luxury! To this
kindness she added the offer of two beds, which were eagerly and
thankfully accepted by Lieutenants Ingleby and Bell. For my part, I
preferred not pulling off my wet clothes and putting them on again
in the morning, and therefore declined. Spite of our fatigue, we
were all so refreshed by the coffee, that a pleasant hour was passed
chatting to our kind hostess and joking with her man Coché, a sort
of good-humoured, half-witted Caliban. At last sleep began to weigh
heavily on our eyelids. The lady retired to her chamber, Coché hid
himself somewhere, and, sinking back in our old-fashioned high-backed
chairs, we were soon unconscious of everything.

_14th._--Awoke from my slumbers just as the grey dawn began to render
objects visible in the kitchen. My companions still slept soundly,
so without disturbing them I quietly explored my way to the door,
and soon found myself in a pretty little garden, ornamented and
intersected by high hedges or walls of verdure, the young leaves of
which, scarcely yet fully developed, were of the brightest green.
These screens, effectually protecting the beds, in which many an
early flower already blossomed, I thought delightful. It was the
first time I had seen these _brise-vents_, or hornbeam hedges,
which I subsequently found so common. The air of the morning was
delicious, and my clothes having dried during my repose, I again felt
comfortable and happy as I sauntered about the garden, enjoying the
morning song of the little birds, with which the whole neighbourhood
resounded. I could have stayed for ever in this tranquil and, as I
then thought it, lovely retreat. By-and-by my companions turned out,
and we lost no time in getting again under way in order to reach the
gates of Ostend as soon as they opened.

Sass, or Schlickens, where we had passed the night, is the port of
the Bruges canal, and hence the Treckschuyt from Ostend for that
city takes its departure. It cannot be called a village, there being
only a few small houses connected with the canal business, and some
saw-mills and others worked by wind. Surrounded by marsh, it is a
dreary comfortless place, although this was hidden from me in the
early morning by the verdant screens in the miller’s garden.

Our road back to the town, now we had daylight, appeared very short,
and, having dried considerably, was not so slippery as last night.
The gates were not yet opened when we arrived; a crowd of workmen of
different kinds had already assembled and were waiting for admission,
as were we, for a few minutes. At last they opened, and we proceeded
to the harbour in search of our ship. The Quais, beach, &c., were
thronged as on the day before, and we added to the bustle in
disembarking our guns and carriages, &c. This was completed by eleven
o’clock, and we were ready to march forward; but the commissariat
detained us waiting the issue of our rations until three P.M.--four
mortal hours, considering our eagerness to get on and explore this
new country, and the bore of being confined to one spot, since it
was impossible to wander about the town, seeing that we could not
calculate the moment when these gentry might find it convenient
to supply us. Of our horses two were still missing, as were some
saddle-bags and a number of smaller articles; and this is not to be
wondered at when the scandalous manner in which they were thrown
overboard, the badness of the weather, the darkness of the night,
together with the ebbing and flowing of the tide, are taken into
consideration.

The appearance, too, of the troop was vexatious in the extreme. Our
noble horses, yesterday morning so sleek and spirited, now stood
with drooping heads and rough staring coats, plainly indicating
the mischief they had sustained in being taken from a hot hold,
plunged into cold water, and then exposed for more than seven hours
on an open beach to such a tempest of wind and rain as that we
experienced last night. Here was a practical illustration of the
folly of grooming and pampering military horses, destined as they
are to such exposures and privations. As for our men, they looked
jaded, their clothes all soiled with mud and wet, the sabres rusty,
and the bear-skins of their helmets flattened down by the rain.
Still, however, they displayed the same spirit and alacrity as that
which has always been a characteristic of the horse-artillery, more
particularly of G troop.

Whilst thus awaiting our rations, we had ample leisure to look
about us, and amuse ourselves with the varied groups collected on
the quay and the novelty of the scene. To be sure, the principal of
these were English, and mostly soldiers too. Some were drinking at
the doors of the cabarets, knapsacks on their backs, and prepared
to start; others already in movement, escorting baggage; near us a
battery of field-artillery parked, with their horses picketed in a
long line along the rear of the carriages, quietly eating their corn
out of hair nosebags, which ever and anon they would toss in the
air, the better to get at the few remaining grains of their food;
gunners and drivers lying about ready to fall in or mount at the
shortest notice. Here they had passed the night, and the remains
of their fires were still glowing in some rudely-constructed
fireplaces of loose stones or bricks. Such objects were familiar
to our eyes, but they were intermixed with others which were not.
These were the Flemish peasantry, with their heavy countenances,
walking by the side of their long, narrow waggons, and guiding
their noble horses with admirable dexterity through the throng by
long reins of small (very small) cord passing through holes in the
clumsy highly-ornamental collars or haims. Long blue smock-frocks,
decorated with embroidery in coloured worsted about the breast and
shoulders; their skulls ensconced in night-caps, red or white; many
with long thick queues--and all in clumsy wooden shoes. Women, with
hard weather-beaten features, in long-eared caps, enormous gold
pendants in their ears, a small cross on the breast, suspended from
the scraggy neck by a strip of black velvet, thick petticoats, giving
great swell to the hip, and from their shortness exhibiting a pair of
stout understanders cased in coarse blue stockings and terminating
in heavy _sabots_, enriched about the instep by a rabbit’s skin
clumped about in all directions. From time to time a patrol of the
gendarmerie, in plain blue uniforms, with large white grenades on the
skirts and the ends of their valises, broad belts, and high, stiff,
well-polished boots, passed quietly through the assembled crowds;
their quick inquiring eyes cast searchingly about as they moved
leisurely along. At the corner of the quay was a group of boatmen
(not much differing in outward appearance from our own of the same
class) listlessly reclining on the pavement, or lounging up and down
with folded arms, amusing themselves with the bustling anxiety of
a score of soldiers’ wives, who, loaded with children or bundles,
their ample grey or faded red cloaks flying out loosely behind them,
struggled through all impediments opposed to their progress with an
activity, perseverance, and volubility which seemed highly diverting
to the mariners, many of whom, in broken English, were bantering
these amazons, or exchanging coarse jokes with them; at which play,
however,--the ladies being mostly from the Green Isle--the gentlemen
came off second best.

Such were the scenes we contemplated, when a loud cry of dismay
suddenly pervaded the crowd, and all simultaneously rushed to the
ramparts. I followed this movement. The morning, though somewhat
overcast, had been fine, and the wind moderate; but as the day
advanced, and the flood-tide set in, the south-westerly breeze
had gradually increased to a gale. On reaching the rampart, I
immediately observed that the flat shore to the northward, as far as
the eye could reach, was covered with a sheet of white foam from the
tremendous surf breaking on it; whilst the spray, rising in clouds
and borne along before the blast, involved the whole neighbourhood
in a thick salt mist. Nothing could be more savage and wild than the
appearance of the coast. In the offing, numerous vessels under small
sail were running for the harbour. One small brig had missed, and
before assistance could be given, had been whirled round the _jetée_,
and cast broadside on amongst the breakers. Her situation was truly
awful. The surf broke over her in a frightful manner, sending its
spray higher than her masts, and causing her to roll from side to
side until her yards dipped in the water, and induced a belief every
moment that she must roll over. Every now and then a huge wave,
larger than its predecessor, would raise her bodily, and then,
rapidly receding, suddenly let her fall again on the ground with a
concussion that made the masts bend and vibrate like fishing-rods,
and seemed to threaten instant annihilation. Of her sails, some were
torn to rags, and others, flying loose, flapped and fluttered with
a noise that was audible from the rampart, despite the roaring of
the surf. The people on board appeared in great agitation, and kept
shouting to those on shore for assistance, which they were unable
to give. Intense anxiety pervaded the assembled multitude as the
shattered vessel alternately rose to view or was buried in a sea of
foam. Numbers ran down to the sands opposite to her; and from them
she could not have been twenty yards distant, yet could they not
afford the despairing crew the slightest aid. Whilst thus attending
in breathless expectation the horrid catastrophe, the return of our
quartermaster with the rations summoned us unwillingly from the
rampart to commence our march. We afterwards learnt that a boat from
the harbour had succeeded in saving the crew (she had no troops on
board); but the unfortunate pilot who thus gallantly risked his
own life for them was killed by the boat rising suddenly under the
vessel’s counter as he stood in the bow, which dashed his brains out.

Of Ostend I have little to say, my whole time and mind being fully
occupied during the few hours of my stay in it. The impression
it made on me was a dismal one. Narrow dirty streets; gloomy,
old-fashioned, low, mean houses; the whole surrounded by marsh,
sand-hills, or sea; and that sea, from its muddy colour, detracting
nought from the lugubrious effect of the scene. Of the fortifications
I saw still less than of the town; yet, from what little I did see,
it would appear that Ostend depends more upon water than earth or
stone--its great protection consisting in the facility of inundating
the neighbouring marshes. On the Blanckenberg side, situated upon an
eminence (I think of sand), we had a glimpse of Fort Napoleon, and
working parties were busy constructing a redoubt among the sand-hills
toward Nieuport. We had no leisure, however, to visit either.




CHAPTER III.


Right glad were we to find ourselves at last _en route_ from this
dismal place. In passing through the streets towards the barrier,
soon after leaving the quays, we found that we had likewise left all
the bustle, crowd, and confusion behind us. Few people were moving
about in any of them, and some were totally deserted. The prospect
which presented itself on issuing from the gates was as _triste_ and
repulsive as can well be conceived. In front and to the left marsh!
marsh! for miles, and looking black, dreary, and pestilential; the
distance obscured by a red haze, occasioned by the clouds of sand
blown inland by the gale from a range of sand and sand-hills (the
_dûnes_) extending all along the coast. A straight, ill-paved, and
muddy road, running away in long perspective between two wide ditches
filled with stagnant, stinking water, bordered here and there by
a few stunted willows bending to the blast, and their usual cold
colour rendered still more cold by thus exposing the whitish backs
of their young leaves. Such was the scene, in which our column (men,
horses, and carriages, soiled, and looking miserable; the mounted
gunners leaning to windward, with one hand generally upraised holding
on their helmets; the limber-gunners sitting sideways, turning
their backs to the gale) formed an appropriate accompaniment, as it
proceeded slowly along the causeway. About half-way to Ghystelles,[2]
at a barrier, we were rejoiced at finding the horses that had escaped
from us on the sands. The man said they had been there all night.

After traversing these marshes for about five or six miles, we
entered on a country almost as flat, but of a very different
character, highly cultivated and well wooded. The road became an
avenue, whilst the adjoining fields were interspersed everywhere with
patches of copsewood, and rows of tufted bushes serving here and
there as boundaries in place of hedges; the scenery, of course, much
more pleasing, although not seen to advantage under the still gloomy,
overcast sky.

It was late when we reached Ghistel, the appearance of which,
however, was consolatory, and promised some comfort.

Before we could seek that, a troublesome task still remained to be
performed. Our men could not understand their billets, some of which
were on isolated farms a mile or two from the village; neither could
they inquire their way. It therefore became necessary for us to
accompany and see them safely housed ere we could resign ourselves to
the enjoyments of our auberge. In the village itself they were soon
put up, for many of the people spoke or understood a little English.

At length, as night set in, our business was finished, and we all
assembled at our auberge, which, though humble, was delightfully
clean, and to us, after last night’s adventure, appeared luxurious.
No less so was the excellent dinner to which we soon sat down;
whilst doing justice to which we could not help laughing at its
spread, for it was composed, not of solid joints, &c. &c., but of
an immense multitude and variety of little dishes of stews and all
sorts of nameless (to us) things. A bottle of good port would have
rendered us superlatively happy, but that was not to be thought of in
Ghistel; so having amused ourselves, and puzzled the neat, pretty,
black-eyed girl who officiated as _garçon_ by our inquiries for this
our national, but by her unheard-of, beverage, we were fain to make
ourselves comfortable, and pass the evening in social chat over the
poor, thin, though well-flavoured liquor that the house afforded.
Some of our number, to be sure, were unreasonable enough to grumble,
and one actually got the stomach-ache, but whether from the wine or
last night’s wetting it is difficult to say, though he swore it was
the former.

I shall not easily forget my delight on retiring, when I found a most
clean, enticing bed prepared for me, in a pretty little room, the
window of which looked into a quiet well-kept garden. The enormous
pillow at first took me aback. Such a thing! It seemed to occupy half
the bed. I, however, soon made acquaintance with it, and enjoyed a
most delicious sleep. The first steps in a new country are to me
always a source of pleasurable sensations. Everything one sees is
striking, interesting, and makes a lasting impression. This evening
and its enjoyments will long remain a bright spot in my memory.

_15th._ A fine, mild, grey morning. Our people paraded in much
better order, and very much higher spirits, than yesterday, and all
seemed pleased with their entertainment. The novelty amused them,
and every one had some tale to relate of last night’s adventures.
Their hosts had generally been very kind to them, and allowed them to
take as much forage for their horses as they chose. The poor animals,
therefore, had passed the night equally well. In marching out of
Ghistel, I noticed many houses of a superior description to the
rustic dwellings which alone I saw last night. Some of these had much
the appearance of stage scenery, having façades painted to represent
pilasters, urns, wreaths, festoons, &c. &c., all in very childish
taste. These, no doubt, were the villas or _lusthausen_ of the Ostend
citizens.

Our march to Bruges (about twelve miles) was through a country
perfectly flat, but rich and highly cultivated; and from the numerous
little woods, farms, and substantial villages--added, again, to the
charm of novelty--it was far from uninteresting.

About noon we entered the city by a fine, broad, airy street,
rendered pleasing by the intermixture of foliage with its picturesque
buildings, and swarming with people. By-and-by we came to narrower
streets and more antiquated-looking houses; winding our way amongst
which, we at last reached the cavalry barrack, situated in a narrow,
dirty back lane at the further extremity of the town--a large,
heavy, inelegant mass of masonry, more like some old storehouse than
a barrack. Here, in the extensive yard, we parked our guns, and put
our men into the barrack, the rooms of which were large, lofty, and
vaulted, but extremely filthy, so that our people had to regret the
clean comfortable billets and kind hospitality which they would have
enjoyed amongst the inhabitants. A range of ruinous wooden sheds,
extending along two sides of the yard, served as stabling, and
received all our horses.

Having arranged affairs at the barrack, and called on Sir F. Lyons,
the British commandant, we betook ourselves to our billet at the
Hôtel de Commerce, which, however, we had some difficulty in
finding. As this was the first large hotel we had been in, it had
the recommendation of novelty, and everything in it became subject
of curiosity. The large dreary hall; the comfortless bar adjoining,
and separated from it by an immense window or glazed partition, so
unlike the cheerful snug-looking bar of an English inn; the equally
comfortless and gloomy saloon behind it, into which we were shown;
the squalid, dirty appearance of the domestics (men or boys), in
filthy cotton jackets and _bonnets de nuit_,--all served to chill
one on first entering. Our arrival, followed by orderlies and
servants carrying portmanteaus, &c. &c., caused a sensation in the
establishment, every member of which, not excepting the _chêf_,
was assembled to greet us in the hall. For some minutes a scene of
bustle ensued, which ended in mounting the stairs to inspect our
dormitories. These contrasted strangely with the vast apartments
below. From the head of the staircase a long corridor ran right and
left the whole length of the house, off which a number of doors
opened into as many little cells, each barely large enough to contain
bed, chair, and a small table. The beds (without curtains) were very
homely, but quite clean, the furniture and utensils of the commonest
kind. The attendants, having shown us our rooms, withdrew, and with
the sound of their departing footsteps ended the bustle of the day.
When I again stepped out on the gallery, the stillness of the place
astonished me--hall, staircase, bar, all deserted; not a soul to
be seen, nor a sound heard except that of my own tread over the
creaking floor; no ringing of bells; no calls for chambermaid, boots,
or waiter; no running to and fro;--in short, the place appeared
altogether abandoned, and I hastened into the street to lounge away
the time until dinner, of which, however, I had my misgivings.

Bruges is a highly interesting town at all times; but after being
shut out from the Continent so many years, the novelty of everything
one saw enhanced this interest amazingly. My ramble led me through
streets of lofty, whimsically constructed houses, the upper parts
of which sometimes projected in the manner one frequently sees in
our old midland towns, the projections decorated with drop-balls
on fretwork; immense windows sometimes occupied the whole front of
each floor; ample portals, the lofty folding-doors of which were
occasionally studded with iron, like those of a fortress or dungeon;
gables, with high pointed roofs, presented almost everywhere to the
street; chimneys of bizarre and fantastic forms, and surmounted by
a finish of semicircular tiles rising pyramidally over each other;
here and there towers or turrets with high conical roofs;--such were
the architectural peculiarities that attracted my attention. The
long streets running in wavy lines, and of unequal breadth, between
these grotesque buildings, exhibited specimens of costume as novel,
and frequently not less grotesque, which, intermingling with the
scarlet and blue uniforms of our soldiers, very much heightened the
picturesque effect. It was only in the principal thoroughfares and
business parts of the town that all this animation was met with.
In those quarters principally inhabited by the richer citizens
the streets were as dull, solitary, and scrupulously clean as it
is possible to conceive. In these I frequently found myself the
only animated being visible--not a loiterer at a door, not even a
head at a window. Many of even the best houses appeared absolutely
uninhabited. Could this have always been the case? Was this the
state of things when Bruges was the central mart for the whole Pays
Bas, and saw merchants from every nation in Europe crowding to its
fairs in search of its linen and woollen cloth, and of the naval
stores and rich productions of India continually arriving from the
north, the Venetian and other Italian States, when the splendid dress
and magnificent palaces of its citizens were sufficient to excite
the indignation and envy of a queen? Surely not. These grass-grown
streets, now so solitary, then exhibited very different scenes. Many
a plumed and portly burgher then trod their pavement, and many a fair
bejewelled dame graced the numerous windows of its palaces, now so
silent. This decay and depopulation dates from the moment when these
wealthy merchants arrogantly resisted their sovereign, Maximilian,
who, aided by Antwerp and Amsterdam, shut up its port of Sluys, and
thus, diverting its commerce into other channels, inflicted on it
that punishment the effects of which are so perceptible even after
a lapse of more than 300 years. From these melancholy monuments
of fallen grandeur, and the death-like silence of these deserted
streets, I suddenly emerged into the midst of bustle in the Grand
Place, where crowds of peasantry were assembled apparently for the
sole purpose of buying and selling little earthen pots of a peculiar
form (_terrines_), the number of which, disposed in long rows on the
ground, really surprised me. The Stadthouse stands in this place.
It has a lofty square tower, surmounted by another of nearly equal
height of an octagonal form. This certainly possesses no beauty, but
the singularity of the construction attracts notice. From the Place
I wandered to the _Cathédrale_,[3] the very lofty spire of which, I
am told, serves as a landmark for vessels approaching Ostend, though
certainly I do not recollect having seen it there. It is even _said_
by some to be visible from the _banks of the Thames_--a pretty long
view! Entering the temple, I found the garish light of broad day
exchanged for a mysterious twilight, and the busy hum of high market
for a solemn silence, scarcely interrupted by the light step of some
veiled female (of males only a few, very old men, were there) as she
glided to the spot chosen for her devotions, where, rapidly crossing
herself, she sank on her knees before a shrine in some side chapel.
At the high altar, priests in embroidered robes were celebrating mass
with a solemnity which rendered still more ridiculous their repeated
genuflexions, the extinction from time to time of a taper, and the
removal of a crucifix from one end of the altar to another, only to
bring it back the next moment, whilst ever and anon they would bow,
cross themselves, and bow again.

The nave of the church was not spoilt, as ours are, by pews. A
number of plain chairs were assembled round the pillars, and these
served the worshippers to kneel upon--that is, the men, for the
women invariably sank on the pavement in most picturesque attitudes.
Of the latter, most seemed in earnest; but with the former, a duty
was hurried through, in which the heart had evidently little or
no concern. Some certainly placed both knees on the chairs, and,
leaning over the backs with clasped hands, kept their eyes steadily
on the altar, whilst the rapid motion of their lips betrayed the
hurried manner in which they prayed. Others, however, with one knee
only on the chair, and the body half-turned, gazed about them whilst
mumbling over their daily portion of prayer. People were continually
coming in and going out, which seemed to disturb no one, but rather
served as amusement to the gazers just mentioned. However lukewarm
the frequenters of the temple might evince themselves, yet was there
something very impressive in the scene. In a pictorial point of view
it was most interesting, for the building is a fine Gothic structure,
and the interior of these always affords picturesque scenery, even
without such accessories as those furnished by the various kneeling
groups, more particularly of females. Some good pictures I saw, but
did not like to stop and examine them. A striking feature in this
church are the colossal statues of the Apostles perched upon shelves,
one to each column of the nave: the effect is not good. The pulpit,
and staircase leading up to it, are a most elaborate and ingenious
example of sculpture in wood. The impression on me was one of wonder
at the inexhaustible patience of the artist. Sauntering about the
church, near the great door I stumbled upon something not unlike
a sentry-box; it was a confessional! In this sat a sleek-looking
priest, head resting on his left hand, and the ear inclined to a
little grated aperture in one side, through which a female on her
knees, and shrouded in a black veil, poured out her heart in a loud
whisper. The holy man received the communication with becoming
gravity, though it was easy to divine, by a short perusal of his
countenance, that he was receiving nothing but commonplace, or at
best no very important, intelligence. Everything in this religion
appears most childish mummery;--what more so than this? Leaving Notre
Dame, I sought the ramparts. These no longer exist in a military
sense, but the high grassy mounds which remain, being planted with
trees, serve at once as a pretty promenade, and diversify the views
of the city from without. The moat in most places still remains
green--almost as the meadows--with aquatic plants. Some of the
ancient gateways, also, are still there to tell a tale of other
times. These, with their sombre grey towers, roofed with tile, are
eminently picturesque, and harmonise well with the other buildings
of the town. These towers, with high conical roofs, which one meets
almost everywhere throughout the Continent, particularly in this
country, form a characteristic feature, distinguishing its scenery
from that of the British Islands, where the ruins of ancient castles
have almost invariably their round or square towers terminated by
a castellated parapet and flat roof. True it is that the Irish
round-towers have such roofs; but they are low, and form a very small
portion in the general aspect of the building: as also those solitary
square towers seen along the Scottish Border, and sprinkled here
and there over the soil of Ireland--the dwellings or keeps of petty
chieftains--were also surmounted by high, but not conical roofs.

Tired of rambling about the streets, I returned to our hotel, where,
to my surprise, an excellent dinner awaited me, exceedingly well
served, and the attendants (who had made themselves clean) very
active and obliging. Among these a boy of fifteen or sixteen was a
perfect beauty--so much so as to excite universal admiration. Nor
must I forget another beauty of a far different kind--some very old
and genuine cognac. It was quite a liqueur; and we were so pleased
with it, that each secured a small stock to carry forward with him.
In short, we went to bed in better humour with the Hôtel de Commerce.




CHAPTER IV.


_16th._ Marched through a country very similar to that of
yesterday--that is, flat rich soil, highly cultivated, very populous,
and diversified with patches of wood, &c.--to Eccloo (_chêf lieu
du canton_), a neat little village consisting of two broad streets
forming a sort of place at the point of union, where we parked our
guns, despite the objections of the inhabitants, who were woefully
afraid of an explosion. The Duke of Wellington, _en route_ to Ostend,
passed as we were forming up, and scrutinised us pretty closely, but
said nothing, although I afterwards learned that it was positively
against orders to park ammunition of any kind in a village.

The landlord of the only auberge was so very insolent that we formed
a mess for the day in one of our billets, our own servants cooking
for us. The fare was not sumptuous, but, _en revanche_, very cheap,
consisting entirely of our rations. My own billet here was in the
house of a widow, who kept a hardware shop--humble, but, as usual in
this country, a pattern of cleanliness. Returning from the mess, I
joined the old lady and her daughter in their little parlour behind
the shop, and two or three neighbours coming in, the conversation
became animated. The subject was the return of Napoleon and the
probable consequences. According to their ideas, our cause was
hopeless. Last year our hostess had lodged an officer of Cossacks,
whom she described as a most gentlemanly man.

_17th._ The same description of country accompanied us to Ghent. At
the large village of Lovendeghem the road joined the canal; and here
we obtained the first view of this celebrated city, the birthplace
of Charles V., and the scene of so many interesting events in the
history of the middle ages, forming, with its numerous towers, a fine
termination to the long vista of the canal.

Nearer the coast the trees had been small and somewhat stunted;
indeed, most of the woods we had seen were merely coppice. Here,
however, they assumed a different character, being of large size and
great luxuriance, giving a much higher interest to the landscape as
they bordered the fine meadows lying along either side of the canal,
on the bank of which our road lay. The scenery now became further
enriched and enlivened by the frequent occurrence of country-seats,
generally of brick, and embowered in foliage; a lawn stretching down
to the canal, and terminated by a terrace with a low parapet-wall and
a summer-house at one end of it. The only boat, however, we met, was
the packet going to Bruges; and the road itself was so solitary that,
had not our eyes convinced us to the contrary, we should never have
imagined ourselves approaching so rich and populous a city.

About two P.M. we reached the canal harbour, separated from the city
by a handsome _barrière_ (_grille_) or iron railing in imitation of
spears, the shafts painted light blue, with gilded blades. A small
building, with the word “_Octroi_” in large letters over the door,
stood on one side of the gate by which we now entered the capital of
Flanders, and immediately found ourselves in a fine broad street,
with large and stately houses on either side. Yet the very first
impression was that of disappointment. The street was lonely, almost
deserted, and nearly every second house exhibited a board bearing a
notice in French and Flemish that it was to sell or let--“Maison à
louer,” “Huys zu heuer,” or “Maison à vendre,” &c. &c. Curious it
is that two languages should be indispensably necessary; but such
seems to be the case here, for I observed that all proclamations and
public notices of any kind were invariably in French and Flemish. We
proceeded some way through the same sort of quiet and (apparently)
depopulated region; but at last, crossing a broad canal, or, may
be, one of the several rivers which here unite, we came at once
into the very heart of bustle, business, fine shops, and crowds of
people, continuing on nearly a mile, through all which we at last
reached the cavalry barracks (our destination), quite at the further
extremity of the town, near the Barrière de Bruxelles, where we
parked our guns and put up our horses; but there was no room for
the men, consequently they were billeted.[4] Nothing could be more
inconvenient than this arrangement, though I believe it could not
be helped, the place being already crowded with troops, English and
French--for this was the headquarters of Louis XVIII.’s phantom of
an army. Upon ascertaining the situation of our billets, too, we
found things still worse, these being generally in the Quartier de
Bruge, a distance of nearly one and a half miles from the barrack,
and some still farther off--one detachment being billeted at La
Barqué, a cabaret on the canal harbour, and another at some village
still farther off. A serious inconvenience this for horse-soldiers,
whose duties required them to be so continually at the barrack, and
most harassing when it is recollected that the distance from barrier
to barrier is reckoned three miles--the whole distance over an
execrable pavement. It was not without some trouble that I succeeded
in finding my own billet in Bruge Straet, a respectable house, but
nowise remarkable either for size or architecture. My host, a stout
cheerful-looking old gentleman, whose bearing and dress bespoke the
opulent citizen, met me in the gateway, and with great cordiality
(recognising my billet) ushered me into a large room by the side
of the brick-paved entry, announcing it as mine during my stay,
at the same time offering me the use of his whole establishment,
particularly of his cook. This last I accepted with pleasure, having
arranged with my officers that our mess should be in my quarter,
wherever that might be. Meantime, my baggage-cart having been
drawn up the narrow yard and the horses dismissed, the great gates
reclosed, and the bustle of arrival subsided, everything sank into
silence--a silence as predominating in the street without as within
the house.

My apartment was a large, lofty, long room, running back from the
street, towards which two high windows admitted such insufficient
light that even in fine weather it was particularly gloomy. At the
farther end two folding-doors cut off a portion of its length, and
this was fitted up as a bed-chamber--dark enough. The furniture
of the _salle_ consisted of a few common chairs and a large table
covered with oil-cloth. The floor was without carpet, as the windows
were without either blinds or curtains. How the rest of the house
might have been fitted up I am ignorant, having seen no more of its
interior than the kitchen, which opened into the yard, and that was
certainly the neatest and cleanest I ever saw, with its red floor
and red stoves and highly-polished brass pans, &c. &c. Nor did I
ever see much more of the inhabitants; for, with the exception of
two females in the kitchen, the house seemed deserted. A man-servant
certainly assisted at our dinner, but we rarely saw even him at any
other time. Not a voice--not a foot-fall--not a sound of any kind,
unless emanating from ourselves, ever disturbed the death-like
silence that reigned through this establishment. Mine host was, I
believe, a merchant, and went out every morning to his business,
whence he returned not until the evening, at least as far as I
could ascertain. I saw nothing more of him from my first reception
until I called to take leave and thank him for his attentions and
hospitality. These consisted in the assistance of his servants and
the use of his beer-cask, on which we drew for our daily supply.

During the seven days we remained in Ghent, our time was so occupied
by duties that there was little leisure to look about us. Twice every
day it was necessary to be at the barracks, so that a very great
portion of my time was spent in walking backward and forward between
them and Bruge Straet.

Amongst other duties it fell to our lot to furnish a guard of honour
to Louis XVIII., then residing in Ghent, his own troops having been
sent to Alost to make room for the British, which were continually
passing through. Our subalterns were very well pleased with this
arrangement, for the duty was nothing. They found an excellent table,
and passed their time very agreeably with the young men of the _garde
du corps_, some of whom were always in attendance. Many of these were
mere boys, and the anteroom of his most Christian Majesty frequently
exhibited bolstering matches and other amusements, savouring strongly
of the boarding-school; however, they were good-natured, and always
most attentive to the comforts of the officer on guard. The royal
stud was in the barrack stables, and consisted principally of grey
horses, eighteen or twenty of which had been purchased in England at
a sale of _cast horses_ from the Scots Greys.

We frequently met French officers of all ranks, and formed
acquaintance with many gentlemanly, well-informed men. At the Lion
d’Or and Hôtel de Flandre we found there was a table-d’hôte every
night at 8 o’clock, and, by way of passing the evening, usually
resorted to one or the other for supper. Here we were sure of meeting
many Frenchmen, and as the same people were generally constant
attendants, we became intimate, and discussed the merits of our
national troops respectively over our wine or _ponche_. It was the
first time most of them had had an opportunity of inspecting British
troops closely, though many had often met them in the field; and
they were very curious in their inquiries into the organisation,
government, and equipment of our army. Although allowing all due
credit to the bravery displayed by our troops in the Peninsula, and
the talents of our General (the Duke), yet were they unanimous in
their belief that neither would avail in the approaching conflict,
and that we must succumb before their idol and his grand army; for
though these gentlemen had deserted Napoleon to follow the fortunes
of Louis XVIII., it was evident they still revered the former. Their
admiration of our troops, particularly of the cavalry, was very
great; but they expressed astonishment at seeing so few decorations.
It was in vain we asserted that medals were rarely given in the
British army, and then only to commanding officers, &c. They shook
their heads, appeared incredulous, and asked, “Where are the troops
that fought in Spain?” There might have been something more than
mere curiosity in all this. There might have been an anxiety to
ascertain whether their countrymen were about to cope with veterans
or young soldiers. It might have been thrown out as a lure, to
provoke information relative to the present employment of those
veteran bands. Moreover, I shrewdly suspected many of these gentlemen
were actually spies. Amongst others who had followed Louis XVIII.
was Marmont. I think it was the day after our arrival, passing over
the open space near the Place d’Armes, by the river, I saw a French
general officer exercising a horse in the _manège_, and learnt with
astonishment that this was Marmont; for the man in question had
_two_ good arms--whereas, for years past, I had, in common with
most people in England, looked upon it as a fact that he had left
one at Salamanca. French deserters, both officers and privates,
were daily coming in; it was said they deserted by hundreds. Be
that as it may, I one day saw a column of thirty march up to the
Bureau des Logements. They were in a most miserable plight--all in
rags--and apparently half-starved. All these deserters, as well as
the rest, were forwarded without delay to Alost. The Commissaire des
Logements told me that, after the departure of the French troops to
Alost, there still remained more than 300 of his Majesty’s immediate
followers for whom it was necessary to provide in Ghent.

The huzzars of the K. G. Legion, stationed about Detto, and toward
the frontier, frequently sent intelligence of hostile movements; but
except this, we were in perfect ignorance of the positions either of
our own or the French army. Regiments arrived from England, halted a
night, and were off again we knew not where.

Meantime we lived well, and saw as much of the place as our scanty
time would permit. The markets were most abundantly supplied with
everything, and very cheap; so that with the assistance of our
_bourgmestre’s_ cook we kept an excellent table at a moderate rate.
As for our horses, although they had exhibited symptoms of having
felt their exposure on the sands at Ostend when we first arrived, yet
rest and good forage soon restored their original appearance, and we
began to get tired of Ghent and long for a forward move.

I cannot, however, bid adieu to Ghent without recording a few notes,
which my confined means of observation enabled me to preserve; and
be it remembered that, at that period, the continent of Europe
was almost a _terra incognita_ to Englishmen, to whom everything,
therefore, even trifles, bore a degree of interest, which our present
intimate acquaintance may cause to appear puerile at the present day.

I need not say that Ghent is a large and populous city, standing
upon ground generally flat, intersected and divided into numerous
islands by three or four rivers, besides canals, which hold their
course through it, nor that it is the birthplace of the Emperor
Charles V.; but I may add that Ghent, independent of its historical
recollections, is, and ever must be, a most interesting place,
particularly to the artist; for where can we see such picturesque
street-scenes as are exhibited here? The streets, bordered by lofty
houses generally of a quaint style of architecture, wind their
devious way--now narrow, now spreading out to an ample breadth--with
an irregularity that certainly leaves no room to complain of
sameness. This irregularity attaches as much to the houses as to the
streets. These are of every variety--high stepped gables towards
the street, little turrets with pointed roofs, others with large
French windows, and, again, others all window, as at Bruges. These,
intermingled with, and partially seen through, the foliage of the
trees, which in many places border the canals, &c., offer most
picturesque morsels, precisely such as one sees in the pictures of
the old Flemish painters, so that they appeared quite familiar.
This effect is considerably heightened by the deep embrasures of
the windows, lofty grotesquely ornamented portals, and, above all,
the rich deep tone of colouring that pervaded the whole. Chapels
and churches, too--some in the Gothic, others Italian, or still
more modern styles--intervened continually, the whole forming rich
perspectives, animated by the varied and bustling crowds of citizens,
peasants, soldiers, &c. One peculiarity struck me as savouring much
of indolence and curiosity combined: almost every house, at one or
more windows of the first floor, had small square mirrors, sometimes
single, sometimes double, so arranged that persons seated within
the room could see the passengers on the _trottoir_ below without
stirring from their seats. In English towns one constantly sees heads
peeping over the blinds; here, no one is seen at the windows.

Near the centre of the city is the Place d’Armes, a large
square, having the area ornamented by rows of well-grown linden
trees, and its houses of a superior character to those in the
adjoining quarters. This is the focus of business, and in this
neighbourhood one sees all the best shops, some of which astonished
us by the profuse display of Indian goods, particularly silk
pocket-handkerchiefs, which we found of the very finest quality, and
at about half the price they sold at in England. The Place d’Armes
is, however, spoiled in a great measure by the shabby wooden railing
enclosing the promenade.

In this square was a magnificent hotel, at least as far as outward
appearance went. The Duc de Berri had his quarters in it; and one
day, as I returned from the barrack, I saw him set off for Alost.
This was the first travelling equipage I had seen in the country;
and consequently I was much amused with the coxcombry and costume
of the postilions--their glazed hats stuck on one side; queues, each
with the side-hair neatly plaited in; short, very short jackets;
and, above all, the enormous jack-boots. But if the costume amused,
the dexterity with which they handled their whips astonished
me--“klang-klang-klang,”--between them they almost made music. The
rapid and dexterous manner in which, flourishing their whips over
their heads, they crack them--before, behind, right, and left--is of
a piece with that manual dexterity with which our laboratory-boys
make ball-cartridges, and our drummers, by quickly-repeated but
distinct taps, produce a rolling sound in which the most delicate ear
cannot detect a break. But to return from this digression.

The very little time I had to myself did not admit of seeing half
the place, and my wanderings were pretty much confined to the
neighbourhood of the line between Bruges Straet and the barrack.
Sometimes, however, I did extend a little to the right and left,
and in one of these excursions got a glimpse, but no more, of some
pleasant gardens--public, I suppose--in which numerous walks,
overarched with verdure, intersected each other, and presented,
as the weather was hot, most inviting retreats. At another time
I wandered as far as the Citadel,--I suppose the one built by
William III. of England, not that of Charles V., of which not a
vestige remains. It must have been but an insignificant work;--the
plan, I think, a parallelogram. The mounds of the ramparts remain
entire, and the wet ditch. At present it is completely overlooked
by the neighbouring houses. From this work, which is situated just
without the _barrière_ of the road to Thermonde, one commands a
prospect, perhaps, of its kind unrivalled. Here are no picturesque
or romantic features, but the eye wanders unimpeded over a region
as flat as the ocean, and, like it, only terminating in the distant
horizon. This region is amongst the richest in the world, and, spite
of its flatness, offers to our view a scene at once pleasing and
astonishing. Verdant meadows, enameled with myriads of yellow and
white flowers, amidst which graze innumerable herds of the finest
cattle, extend for miles from the city, and then, intermingled with
corn-fields, groves, and thickets, amidst which are seen everywhere
villages, farms, and scattered houses, melt gradually away into the
blue distance. In the immediate foreground, a singular hillock,
crowned by a little chapel and environed by trees, rears its form
and enhances the picture by variety of feature and the interesting
peeps admitted between the openings of the foliage. The road from
Thermonde passes through this grove, and, covered as it generally
is (or was, when I saw it) with groups of market-people, carts,
and cattle, &c., throws a charming animation into the scene. The
lengthened perspective, too, of this road running away in a straight
line bordered by trees, and gradually diminishing until lost in the
distance, breaks the unvaried flatness of the meadows, and prevents
one feeling them monotonous. Returning from the Citadel, I joined
the rustic crowd pouring in through the _barrière_, and, following
the stream, was brought by it into an extensive square surrounded
by lofty and antique-looking houses, apparently the exclusive abode
of the humbler classes of merchants or artisans. The crowd here was
immense; and it was not without difficulty that I made my way through
it. I think this is the Marché aux Grains. Not far from thence I
stumbled on the great gun, called the Basilisc,[5] said to have been
cast by order of Charles V., to overawe the Ghentois. As far as I
could see, this enormous piece, which reposes on a mass of brickwork
in an open space at the turn of the street, is a plain unornamented
cylinder of iron (wrought). It was too high for minute inspection.
The pedestal upon which it rests serves also as a public fountain,
about which are usually groups of gossiping women with their pitchers
under their arms, or noisy boys.

Amongst the buildings of Ghent, interesting from their style, the
ancient Gothic Hôtel de Ville stands pre-eminent, with its rich and
elaborately-ornamented façades. This venerable pile is said to have
been built, at least the older part of it, in the beginning of the
seventh century. Another remnant of antiquity, perhaps still more
old, I discovered in my own neighbourhood--this was the ancient
castle, Castrum Ganda(?), a small open space, in the corner of which
are the remains of thick walls and one tower still nearly entire--its
different storeys affording lodgment to several poor families, from
whom, however, I sought in vain for any information respecting these
ruins. From the direction of the patches of wall, I conjectured that
the open space was once the inner court of the castle.

In the same quarter was one of the markets, through which I passed
every day in going to and coming from the barrack; it was for meat
and vegetables, &c. The latter were exposed for sale in the open air
in baskets, as with us; and here, as everywhere else, one could not
but be struck with the great abundance and fine quality of every
produce of this rich country. One vegetable seemingly in great
request was the tender root of the hop plant. This, when peeled and
stewed in milk, is really delicious. We had it every day on our
table, and it was a general favourite. A principal occupation of the
market-women was peeling these roots, which were then thrown into a
basin of cold water to keep them fresh, and thus exposed for sale.
The meat-market adjoining was under cover and closed in, like the
central avenue of Covent Garden, forming a long street of stalls,
each full of the finest meat imaginable, cut up into joints, &c.,
whilst overhead, suspended under the roof, were innumerable whole
carcasses of bullocks, sheep, and pigs. Nothing could exceed the
cleanliness of this place, or the neatness and propriety of dress of
the butchers, their wives, and daughters. Unlike our markets, there
was no loud talking, no confused gabbling of tongues; everything
seemed conducted with the utmost quiet, order, and decency. The
middle of the passage was thronged with well-dressed people of all
classes and both sexes. On entering I was struck with a singular dull
murmuring sound that pervaded the building, somewhat resembling the
sound of a distant mill, which I soon perceived to be produced by the
active industry of the women, who, instead of sitting idly waiting
for custom, were all busily employed pounding sausage-meat. If ever
I could relish a sausage it would be a Ghent one, for nothing can
exceed the cleanliness of the operators and their operations, or the
goodness of the materials of which they are made. One may form some
idea of the abundance of this fine country from the fact that, having
been all last year the seat of war, and now everywhere occupied by
numerous foreign troops, still there appeared no diminution in the
supplies, and the markets of every town exhibit as great a profusion
as ever.

With the exception of a slight sandy eminence at Eccloo, the
first undulations of the country we had yet seen were at Ghent.
On the southern side of the town I ascended with pleasure a
hill, which apparently was the commencement of a sort of rolling
country extending towards Deynse. From its summit is an excellent
view of the city and the fine country around it. Meadows of
the liveliest green, intersected by numerous streams, exhibited
everywhere immense quantities of linen exposed for bleaching--such
was the scene immediately below. In the distance, as the plain
became foreshortened, it seemed to be bounded by woods. The city
itself was rendered a more pleasing object by having its sombre
masses broken and relieved by large plots of garden-ground and the
frequent intervention of foliage. On this hill stood a large square
building, once a monastery, but suppressed during the Revolution,
like many others. To what use it is now turned I could not guess,
as not a living soul was to be seen in or about it of whom to make
inquiry. The massive pile, with its numerous windows, high roof, and
yawning portal, was not an unpicturesque object. I sauntered into
its solitary court; grass had almost overgrown the pavement, and
desolation was stamped on every feature. I could not look on all this
without indulging in a dream, and in my mind’s eye embodying fat and
lazy monks strolling about the court, or lounging in idle converse on
the stone benches against the sunny wall; again, some more venerable
figure passing the corridors in silent meditation. On the road from
the town, too, I conjured up groups of ascending and descending
brothers, and though not approving of their vocation, could not but
regret the absence of their picturesque costume. The only convent I
saw besides this in Ghent was an inhabited one, and it is to be hoped
always will be. This is the Beguinage, to which I hardly know whether
the term “convent” should be applied, for it rather resembles a small
town. Each of the sisters has a separate dwelling, with a little
flower-garden in front of it, much in the style of some of our better
kind of alms-houses in England. It appears an old building, and is
surrounded by a moat.

The Cathedral of St Bavon being in our neighbourhood, and not much
out of the way of my daily walks, I frequently went in to see what
was going on; for one goes to these Catholic ceremonies as to any
other show. This church makes no great appearance from without, but
the interior is imposing and beautiful, as all Gothic interiors are.
The panels of the choir over the stalls are a series of paintings
exceedingly well executed, representing the acts of St Paul, I
believe. The curiosities of the church are the crypt, the tombs,
and the pulpit. The former of these probably originated in the
unsoundness of the ground rendering such a foundation necessary.
Its arches are semicircular, and spring from low but very massive
pillars. Mass is sometimes performed here, but only often enough,
I should imagine, to prevent its desecration. Of the tombs, there
are two of very admirable sculpture--the one in white, the other in
black marble--both, I think, of bishops. The pulpit is like that of
Bruges--an elaborate piece of carving in wood--notable monument of
patience and perseverance. One evening, attracted by the chanting, I
walked in, just as a procession wound slowly from behind the choir,
and advanced with banners and lighted tapers down the side aisle.
The approaching twilight had thrown every part of the church into
a mysterious obscurity, harmonising well with such a scene. Two
boys in scarlet surplices, with shaven heads, but beautiful faces,
came first, swinging about large handsome censers of silver. The
atmosphere was soon impregnated with the smoking frankincense, whose
odour was well calculated to aid the imposing effect. Two banners,
in form resembling the labarum, followed. To these succeeded a train
of priests, in variously-coloured, rich, and picturesque dresses,
some bearing other banners of different shapes and devices; and
a number of boys, all habited like those already mentioned, and
equally fair, flanked the procession, and enveloped it in a light
haze by the fumes of their incessantly swinging censers. The chant
had just died away as I entered the nave, and the procession, with
solemn, silent tread, moved slowly down the aisle--the only sound
that broke upon the ear being the grating rattle of the censer-lids
as they were drawn rapidly up and down the chains. Then again the
full impressive harmony of the chant filled the vaulted roof with its
sweet and solemn notes, died away, and after another pause was again
and again resumed; and thus, having made the circuit of the nave, the
procession became gradually lost in the obscurity of the aisle as it
slowly retired behind the choir, whence at intervals, softened by
distance, the chant still rose over the dividing screen behind the
high altar.

Puerile as these exhibitions may be, the effect on me was exciting;
and as the last notes were faintly re-echoed through the building,
I left it in a frame of mind far different from that in which I had
entered.

On the Sunday we passed in Ghent a mass was celebrated expressly
for Monsieur (le Comte d’Artois). Expecting something grand, I
repaired to the cathedral in company with several other officers.
We were received with great civility by the functionaries of the
establishment, and provided with seats in the stalls and organ-loft.
Our party formed the whole congregation, for there were none of
the inhabitants. We had not been long seated ere a slight movement
and the shuffling of feet in the direction of the grand entrance
announced the approach of the illustrious communicant; and Monsieur
entered the choir, followed at a little distance by the gentlemen of
his suite: a small man of good figure, but of no very distinguished
appearance. He was dressed in a blue uniform coat with silver
embroidery, white breeches, and silk stockings. He advanced with a
quick pace to the steps of the high altar, where a single chair had
been placed for him, bowed very low, crossed himself most devoutly,
bowed again, and, kneeling on the chair with his arms resting on the
back, buried his face in his hands, and in this attitude remained
throughout the ceremony. His suite, military and civil, ranged
themselves across the choir behind him. A few found chairs, and knelt
on them, but the greater part remained standing, and seemed little
interested in the service. At length, to my great joy, the last taper
was extinguished, and, tired to death, I made my escape, resolved
never again to attend a royal mass.

With the interior of the houses in Ghent I had little acquaintance,
having seen no more of them than the rooms inhabited by our own
officers. In our Quartier de Bruges were many very large and even
magnificent ones--some of them in the modern style, with French
windows, of three or four stories, or occasionally only one, with
a basement entirely blank; others, again, in the heavy antique
Flemish style, with large windows in deep embrasures (perhaps with
little panes of glass set in lead, and divided by heavy stone
mullions)--those on the ground-floor defended by an iron cage, as
in Spain; lofty folding-doors, full of iron studs, surmounted by a
cumbrous, tasteless pediment, or an equally cumbrous escutcheon,
looking gloomily magnificent. In all cases, however, the most
scrupulous cleanliness and neatness were general characteristics; and
as the street-doors usually stood wide open throughout the day, the
eye of the passenger, as it glanced through the darkened perspective
of the entrance-hall, was sure to be refreshed by the vivid verdure
of vines and acacias decorating the interior court--a never-failing
accompaniment, particularly to the older houses.

One of my officers, with whom I had established a breakfast mess, was
billeted in a house (or rather palace) of the latter description
in the Rue de Poivre (Pepper Straet). The rooms in this were of
magnificent dimensions, wainscoted with some dark wood, the doorways
and ceilings ornamented with arabesques. They were scrupulously
clean, but very bare of furniture, the little there was (merely
chairs and tables) clumsy and antique--folding-doors with their
ornamented encasements reaching to the ceiling--neither door nor
window frames painted. The whole house was as deserted and silent as
I have described my own to be--gloomily obscure; but this, as the
weather was hot, formed a recommendation, for it was deliciously
cool. The only inhabitants ever seen either by my companion or myself
were the lord of the mansion--a most precise, polite, frigid little
sexagenarian, and an old domestic in cotton jacket and _bonnet
de nuit_, who sometimes assisted Q.’s servant. The old gentleman
was, however, most civil in going through the ceremony of offering
everything his house afforded, but what that might be there were no
means of ascertaining, for we never either saw or smelt his kitchen.
The garden, an irregular area of no great dimensions, presented a
grove of trees with thickets of underwood, threaded in all directions
by narrow serpentine walks; and to prevent a sense of confinement,
I suppose, the high boundary-wall was painted from top to bottom
in distemper, with the representation of a distant country sky and
all. The effect of this, in my opinion, was vastly inferior to
that which would have been produced by covering it with vines or
flowering creepers. Another of our people dwelt in a house of quite
a different description--it was one of those already mentioned
as having a blank basement, and giving but a single row of large
French windows to the street. My friend’s apartments were truly
luxurious. The walls were covered with French paper representing
the scenery of some tropical region, the furniture (of which there
was even a superfluity) all elegant; the large windows, adorned by
ample draperies, looked out upon a lovely and luxuriant garden,
and the light that entered through them was broken and tempered by
festoons of vine leaves that hung across them, whilst the air came
redolent of delicious odours from the ocean of flowers below, and
the ear was entertained with the sweet warbling of birds suspended
in pretty cages of brass wire in all parts of the house. The family
consisted of several females--handsome, elegant, and simple in their
dress; women--servants, scrupulously neat and clean, but not a man.
These ladies must have been people of some consequence, if we may
judge from the number and respectability of their visitors. The
general aspect of the population of Ghent, as seen in the streets,
&c., did not strike me as having anything very peculiar in it to
attract the attention of a foreigner; the numbers, however, and to
him novel appearance, of the secular clergy form a feature not to
be omitted. An Englishman is totally unused to having the Church
and its accessories so constantly in his presence as he here finds
it. Both eyes and ears remind him perpetually of one and the other.
The _carillons_, and the irregular unmeaning jingle-jangle of the
bells from the numerous churches, continuing more or less throughout
the day--the monotonous nasal chant issuing from every church one
passes (and they constantly recur)--the occasional rencontre of some
procession, and the number of priests to be seen everywhere in black
cassocks and bands, with very small three-cornered cocked-hats stuck
formally on their well-powdered heads--never allow one to forget Holy
Mother Church as a leading member of the commonwealth. These priests
all look sleek and in good case--they are evidently well fed; and
it is amusing to see some of them (very young men) gliding along
with downcast eyes (_vultus dejectu_) and demure steps, whilst ever
and anon a stealthy sidelong glance announces that their thoughts
are not entirely abstracted in devotional meditation--that they are
not insensible to the excitement of the busy scene around them. To
these maybe added the dowdy, homely figures of the Beguines in their
inelegant black dresses, as inelegant and truly _bizarre_ caps of
snow-white linen floating like enormous wings on either side of their
heads. The remainder of the population, as I have said, offered
nothing very striking in the way of costume, at least as far as
regarded the higher classes. People everywhere now have adopted, it
may be said, a common uniform. All the male world wear round hats,
tail or frock coats of sober colours, and trousers. The rich old
_bourgmestres_, for instance, are precisely what one would figure to
himself a _bourgmestre_ to be--fat, portly, aldermanly men, often in
cocked-hats and powdered wigs, a sober or sad-coloured suit of good
broad-cloth, amply cut, breeches ditto, silver knee-buckles, white
or striped silk stockings, clumsy, square-toed, but well-polished,
high-quartered shoes, with enormous silver buckles--quite antiques;
the finish, a handsome cane with golden knob, sometimes ruffles,
figured silk waistcoats, &c. &c. The peasantry frequenting the
markets differed from our people of the same class in the prevalence
of short striped cotton jackets, caps, and _sabots_. Many of them,
like our rustics, wore smock-frocks, much ornamented about the
back, breast, and shoulders by embroidery in coloured worsteds;
these frocks, however, are generally dark-blue. The street groups
of the middle and lower classes were principally characterised
by the frequency of short jackets, generally nankin or striped
cotton, breeches of velveteen, with silver knee-buckles and striped
stockings; cloth, nankin, or a sort of grey linen, foraging-caps of
all shapes--some trimmed with wool or fur, generally having long
pendant tassels from the top, and almost all having immense broad
shades either of leather, or of the same material as the cap.

Of the manners of a people it would be presumption to speak on so
short an acquaintance. The little intercourse we had with them,
however, made a favourable impression on us. We found those of the
upper classes obliging and polite; the tradesmen civil and attentive;
the labouring classes quiet, orderly, and extremely respectful.

In point of religion, the men of the upper classes appeared
indifferent or lukewarm, the women very assiduous in the performance
of ceremonies, in which it was obvious the heart frequently had
little concern. The lower orders were superstitious, priest-ridden,
and extremely punctual in the performance of their duties. The
peasantry alone seemed quite in earnest. I may characterise the
whole population, high and low, as priest-ridden; for, however
indifferent the men of the former may be, they are not a whit the
less subservient to these their spiritual, and generally temporal,
masters.

It would be unjust to condemn as immoral a whole people for the vices
found in their cities. We ought not, therefore, to pass unqualified
censure on the Flemings because this was exhibited to us openly in
the streets of their great cities. I allude to the barefaced manner
in which we were tormented incessantly by a number of boys making the
most impudent and depraved propositions, and that with a pertinacity
not readily repulsed. An instance of moral and religious degradation,
I am happy to say, we rarely met with afterwards until our arrival at
that hotbed of vice--Paris.

Our last transaction in Ghent was the taking over a number of
baggage-mules from Captain Clive’s Brigade of the German Legion
Artillery. These beautiful animals they had brought with them from
Spain, and I shall never forget the grief and indignation with which
they parted with them. Affection for, and care of, his horse, is the
trait, _par excellence_, which distinguishes the German dragoon from
the English. The former would sell everything to feed his horse;
the latter would sell his horse itself for spirits, or the means of
obtaining them. The one never thinks of himself until his horse is
provided for; the other looks upon the animal as a curse and a source
of perpetual drudgery to himself, and gives himself no concern about
it when once away from under his officer’s eye. The German accustoms
his horse to partake of his own fare. I remember a beautiful mare,
belonging to a sergeant of the 3d Hussars, K.G.L., which would even
eat onions. She was one of the very few that escaped after the
disastrous retreat of Corunna, and had been saved and smuggled on
board ship by the sergeant himself. In the Peninsula the only means
of enforcing some attention to their horses amongst our English
regiments was to make every man walk and carry his saddle-bags whose
horse died or was ill.




CHAPTER V.


_April 24._--Orders to march to-morrow morning to Thermonde. At a
loss to know where this can be, but find it is Dendermonde. Whether
this be in consequence of any movement of the French army, or only
for the purpose of concentration, we are in the dark. The other
troops of horse-artillery in Ghent have also received orders to
march, but we move independently of each other. To-day passed in
preparation, visiting, and leave-taking. Called on my host, whom
I found in a handsome well-furnished drawing-room at the back of
the house, looking over a very nice garden. Had no idea of so much
cheerfulness and comfort existing under our roof, nor of the two
good-looking women I found with him. After much complimenting we
parted.

_25th._--Fine morning. Marched early; leaving Ghent by the road
already mentioned as passing under the Citadel, and crossing
that flat but splendid country which I understand extends without
interruption to Antwerp, or rather to the Tête de Flandre. This is
the Pays de Waes, perhaps the highest cultivated land in Europe. It
is said to have been once little better than moving sand, but that
the great quantities of manure laid on it for so many successive
centuries have completely changed its nature, and produced the fine
rich black mould which is now everywhere of considerable depth. If
this be true, it will in some measure account for the hillock already
spoken of, which is entirely of sand. Passing close under this, I
could not but be struck by the circumstance of this sandy mound
standing in the midst of an otherwise unbroken level, and conjectured
it must be artificial--one of those enormous tumuli erected as the
tomb of departed warriors, or as a look-out, which was a common Roman
custom, particularly in so flat a region. It is about the height of
Silbury, perhaps less, but by no means of so regular a form; its
slope, which is covered with trees and bushes, being excavated and
broken in numerous places, probably for the sand. Standing as it
does amidst a grove of trees, through the boles of which one catches
pretty peeps of the blue distance, and crowned by the little chapel,
independent of its historical or geological existence, it is really
a very interesting object, and forms an admirable foreground to a
picture of the Pays de Waes. Every one does not understand the beauty
of a landscape the principal feature of which is a dead level. Yet
these, like others, have their beauties, which consist principally
in the effect under which they are seen, and the delicious tones
of the aerial perspective gradually melting into the purply tints
of extreme distance. I have often found very exquisite beauty in
these flat Flemish scenes, especially when relieved and animated
by groups of men and cattle, such as one sees in Cuyp and all the
Dutch and Flemish masters. Whether from the richness of the soil, or
some peculiar quality of the atmosphere, I know not, but I always
fancied the colouring here much more vivid than in England, and the
distances much more purply--quite Italian. But I am halting under
the hill; so to proceed. Our road led us through the midst of this
magnificent Pays de Waes, everywhere exhibiting such crops and such
pastures as it is difficult to form an idea of--the latter covered
with fine beasts, which I understand are brought hither from Holland
to fatten. We passed through several populous villages, particularly
Locristy and Seven Eeke, and about fifteen miles from Ghent reached
Lokeren, a large manufacturing town, having all the dirty, smoky,
dismal appearance of our northern manufacturing places, to which the
blackish-coloured stone--somewhat, in colour at least, resembling
the slag used about Bristol as a building material--contributes not
a little. The houses, of three and four storeys, appeared tenanted
each by many families; and the population had all the squalid, filthy
character of our own manufacturing population, always excepting those
of Stroudwater and the bottoms in Gloucestershire. Cloth is the
article fabricated here, but of what quality I know not.

A strong column of Hanoverian infantry, composed of several
battalions of militia, crossing our route, detained us at the
entrance of the town more than half an hour, to the great amusement
of a crowd of gazing weavers and dyers, with upturned sleeves
and blue hands and arms, who surrounded us. The Hanoverians were
fine-looking troops, generally very young, and completely English in
dress and appointments, except that the officers wore particoloured
sashes. Each battalion had a very good band, though rather
noisy, from the number of jingling instruments entering into its
composition--as cymbals, triangles, ottomans, &c. &c.--all which
are much more patronised by foreigners than by us. The Chaussée
terminating at Lockeren, when we continued our march it was on a
bad cross-road, which soon brought us to Zêle--a large populous
manufacturing village, having a wide, clean street. Houses in the
cottage style, and generally only of one floor. The whole population
turned out to see us pass, with the _curé_ at their head--a tall,
respectable-looking old man, who, judging from the good-humoured
countenance with which he scrutinised our column as it passed, and
the air _empressé_ with which he came forward to offer his advice
respecting the road to Dendermonde, I set down either as a very
amiable person, or very zealous in the cause of legitimacy: we were
feeling our way without a guide, and therefore had to ask. The
respectful, quiet, and contented air of his flock spoke also in his
favour, and, together with the bright eyes of numerous pretty women
among the crowd, left a favourable impression of Zêle.

Henceforward the scenery took a very different aspect, and we
exchanged the smiling, populous, well-wooded country we had been
hitherto traversing for a lugubrious, marshy tract, devoid of
anything that could break its monotony--neither trees nor houses,
and but few cattle, were to be seen, whilst the abominable road
became so slippery that it was with difficulty our horses could keep
their feet.

About half a league from Dendermonde we struck the Scheldt, but
could see nothing of it or the opposite country for the high dyke by
which the river is here confined, and along the foot of which, for
some little distance, our road lay, until it brought us to a wooden
bridge elevated nearly thirty feet above the water, and so tottering
that it was necessary to pass by single divisions, and even then its
vibrations were not pleasant. Our quartermaster, who had been sent
in advance, met us here, with orders not to halt in Dendermonde, but
to proceed on to St Gille, situated beyond it on the Brussels road.
The appearance of things improved here, from the number of trees
about Dendermonde, which we soon after entered by a long, straight,
narrow, gloomy, mean-looking street of low houses, built of the same
dark stone we had seen at Lokeren. This led us to a spacious quay,
encompassing what I supposed to be the harbour, for the water was
very low, and the mud bare, like Bristol. Passing round the head
of this, we soon left the town again, and almost immediately found
ourselves at St Gille, which consists of a few mean houses scattered
along the Chaussée, the only decent one being that of a _juge de
paix_, on which I found myself billeted.

In a country so carefully cultivated as this is, a piece of waste
land is a rarity, and therefore we had some difficulty in forming
our park, which at last was done in a small enclosed cemetery, not
without disturbing the ashes of the dead, and running some risk of
breaking our horses’ legs and our own necks, for the graves had all
been so loosely filled in that the horses sank to their shoulders
in the light soil. Our men and horses were dispersed amongst
the neighbouring farms of the commune, and though rather widely
scattered, yet most comfortably put up everywhere.

Whilst employed at the park my servant had taken my baggage to my
billet, so that on repairing thither I found Madame la Juge, _en
habit de Dimanches_, already waiting at the door to receive me. A
fine and handsome woman, perhaps turned of thirty, and possessing a
degree of _embonpoint_ which, whilst it added dignity to her air,
detracted nothing from the grace of her person. She received me with
more than common politeness, with kindness and cordiality, which, as
an intruder, I felt I had no right to expect, and, conducting me into
the house, assured me that it should be her study to render my stay
at St Gille as agreeable as possible, ushering me into an apartment
destined for my use, and offering the assistance of her servants--in
short, the whole house was at my disposal. All this was not mere
compliment, for in good truth she kept her word to the very letter.
I never experienced greater kindness, or more sincere hospitality,
and under such circumstances soon felt myself perfectly at home in my
neat lodgings.

What a contrast was this to the gloomy billet I left in the morning
in the silent, solitary Rue de Bruges! Here everything was light,
airy, and cheerful. But I must describe my new home. The _apartment_
consisted of a saloon of about eighteen feet square, with a little
cabinet or sleeping-room adjoining and opening from it. Both were
as clean as it was possible to conceive anything could be, and
the white walls perfectly immaculate. Furniture of the simplest
kind--chairs of oak or walnut ranged along the walls, two tables
covered with oil-cloth, neat but scanty window-curtains, with
draperies and fringe, and a most brilliant stove, _en faïence_,
ornamented with brass-work, standing out nearly in the middle of
the floor; that floor of red tiles, or brick highly varnished, the
coolness of which, in the present hot weather, was highly grateful.
I have designated this room as light and airy, and truly it was
so, for it was illuminated by no less than six windows. Three of
these in the front commanded a pleasant view over the well-wooded
and beautifully-cultivated country beyond the great Brussels road,
which ran beneath them--the fields more resembling extensive gardens
than anything else. As this part of the house, projected beyond the
_porte cochère_, a window in the side afforded a peep up the road,
terminated by the town of Dendermonde, which hence appeared embosomed
in trees. Two fine acacias in front of the gateway overshadowed this
with their delicate pensile foliage, and screened it from the hot
rays of the afternoon sun. The remaining two windows in the back
looked into a delicious and carefully-kept garden, divided as usual
by those verdant hornbeam walls into different departments. Such was
my saloon. My bed-room, if so it may be called, was equally neat and
simple in its equipment: a low bedstead without curtains, bedding of
humble materials, but so clean that the most fastidious could have
found no fault with it, a chair or two, and a small dressing-table
in the single window, constituted its whole furniture. Having made
arrangements for establishing our mess here, I set off to visit my
people, who, as before mentioned, were scattered by threes and fours
all over the commune amongst the farmers; and with these good and
simple people I found them already quite at home. In most houses I
found them seated at dinner with the family--at all they had been
invited so to do; and everywhere the greatest good-humour and best
possible understanding prevailed between the host and guests. When
I asked, “Ist der meister content mit den Soldaten?”--gibberish
coined for the occasion, as they understood no French, and I no
Flemish--the answer was always a hearty “Yaw, mynheer--yaw! ist
brav--ist goot”--at the same time goodnaturedly slapping one of
them on the back, and leering archly round at the others. Boys,
women, and children would all swarm round me, exclaiming “Goot,
goot, goot!” Then, anticipating my wish to see the horses, one of
them would invite me to the stables, which, though dark, were all
warm and comfortable. Here I found our cattle stowed away, perhaps,
amongst half-a-dozen of their elephants of horses, literally living
in clover, for their racks and mangers were full of it (the finest
I ever saw), and their stalls of clean straw up to their bellies.
These good people seemed quite proud of having made the lucky brutes
so comfortable. I found afterwards from our Juge de Paix that this
bounty was in some measure repaid by the dung, which is here so
valuable that the production of one horse in four-and-twenty hours is
worth at least three or four pounds of hay, and perhaps four times
the quantity of clover.

These farming establishments were very much alike, generally
speaking; embosomed in orchards, which in their turn are surrounded
by lofty elms. The dwelling-house is usually of brick, only
one floor, a high roof, under which are the dormitories with
garret-windows, sometimes two tiers of them. On the ground-floor the
windows are large and open in the French style, outside shutters
almost invariably _green_. Commonly there are only two rooms on this
floor, one on each side of the passage, the door of which opens on
the yards, as do the windows. One of these rooms is the kitchen,
or ordinary residence of the family, the other is a _salle de
cérémonie_. In the first is the usual display of brass pans, kettles,
crockery, &c., which, with some common benches and a large table or
two, constitute its furniture. As everywhere throughout this country,
the most perfect cleanliness prevails, and the metallic lustre of the
brass is brought out as much as scrubbing can effect. The _salle_
exhibits a collection of stiff old-fashioned chairs with rush bottoms
and high upright carved backs, ponderous oaken tables, snow-white
window-curtains, and a series of very common prints, in as common
frames, suspended from the walls. These usually represent saints,
&c. On the chimney-piece waxen or earthenware figures of animals,
fruits, &c.; and frequently affixed to the wall over the centre one
sees a kind of deep frame or box with glass front, in which, amongst
cut paper, moss, or shell-work, is either a crucifix or a portrait of
the Virgin and child. The barns, stables, cow-houses, and other out
offices, form the other three sides of a square of which the front of
the dwelling is the fourth. A rough pavement of about ten or twelve
feet wide runs all round in front of the building; the remainder of
the area is one vast dunghill, having a reservoir in the centre to
receive its drainings, whilst it receives those of the cow-houses,
stables, and dwelling by means of gutters constructed for the
purpose. This precious fluid is the great dependence of the Flemish
agriculturist, as the principal fertiliser of his fields. When the
land is to be manured, it is carted out upon the grounds in a large
tub (like a brewing-tub). A boy leads the cart very slowly all over
the field, whilst a man, armed with a scoop, keeps scattering it
in all directions. It must be confessed that the fields after this
aspersion do not exhale the most savoury odours, but then nothing can
exceed their fertility. The country about Dendermonde was, generally
speaking, laid out in long narrow patches, separated from each other
sometimes by a belt of turf, sometimes by a footpath, at others by
ditches, along the edge of which might be a growth of alders, but no
regular hedges anywhere. Towards the Dender, ditches of water were
the common division, and these fields were fertilised by irrigation,
not by the scoop, and a more beautiful verdure could not be seen,
all being pastures; of the other fields or patches, each bore a
different crop, some flax, some wheat, some _trèfle_ or clover, some
buckwheat, some hops--the whole district having the appearance of
one vast garden. The soil in general was a light rich mould, but
degenerating into sand as it approached the Scheldt, on the north
side of St Gille. The absence of hedges was fully compensated by the
numerous copses that enriched the scenery in all directions, together
with the rows of trees with which almost every road was bordered, so
that, although a dead level, nothing could be more pleasing than the
pictures it presented, except the tract towards the Scheldt, which
was bleak enough.

My rounds finished, I returned to my billet, where I found our people
all assembled, and we soon sat down to a most excellent dinner. The
wine, which we had procured from the town, was thin, pale, almost
white, but of a very piquant flavour, and over it we were enjoying
ourselves, when a servant came in, and announced that M. le Juge,
having that moment returned from the town, begged permission to
pay his respects to M. le Commandant. Permission granted. Enter a
little vulgar-looking man, about sixty years of age, whose coarse
and by no means prepossessing physiognomy was not improved by the
loss of an eye; nor was his person set off to the best advantage
by his costume, consisting of a shabby blue frock, dark waistcoat
sprigged over with golden flowers, and very long drab pantaloons,
hanging about his legs in large folds, evidently unrestrained by any
suspensatory process. His head was surmounted by a sort of forage-cap
of dark-green velvet, with a band of silver lace, and a silver tassel
falling over the crown. Doffing this, with a profusion of bows he
casts his sharp single eye inquiringly round our party, exclaiming,
“M. le Commandant?” I bow. “M. le Commandant, se trouve-t-il bien
ici?” I assent, and express my gratitude to his better half for
her attentions. “Da tout, M. le Commandant, da tout! Elle n’a rien
fait que son devoir aupres de vous, M. le Commandant! Et de plus,
je vous engagé de considerer la maison and les domestiques tous à
votre service, M. le Commandant--tous, tous, tous!” (pronouncing
strongly the final _s_ of the last word) “et si, par hazard, M. le
Commandant aimerait la solitude, voilà la joli promenade là bas,”
pointing to the garden. All this passed with us as mere words; but
we had formed a wrong estimate of our Juge, who fulfilled to the
utmost his professions, and turned out a very worthy fellow. Whilst
this colloquy was in progress, our friend had established himself
at the table with less ceremony than might have been expected from
so complimentary a gentleman, and the bottle, circulating briskly,
had the usual effect of loosening tongues and tightening friendship.
M. le Juge begged to know where we had obtained our wine, which he
did not approve of; it was not such as we ought to drink; begged
permission to send for some of a very superior quality from his own
cellar. The wine is brought accordingly, a bottle drawn by Monsieur
himself with great solemnity and some grimace, relating at the same
time its whole history. Clean glasses are called for, Monsieur fills
a bumper, and after contemplating it for a moment against the light,
hands it to me with a profound inclination. In colour it exactly
resembles what is on the table. I taste it: there is not a shade of
difference in the flavour. M. le Juge fills a glass for each of my
companions, and hands it to them with the same ceremonious bow. It
was easy to see that their opinions coincided with mine; but we did
not wish to hurt the good man, and so we one and all smacked our
lips, and pronounced it excellent. He immediately ordered a further
supply, and insisted on our drinking nothing else. However, the
bottles becoming mingled on the table, none of us could distinguish
the difference, and our friend himself, I observed, filled his own
glass indiscriminately from the one and the other. He meant to treat
us, and took this way of accomplishing it, no doubt. We found him
an intelligent, facetious companion, although, as we got farther
into the night, he did get a little prosy with his anecdotes of the
good people of Dendermonde. _En revanche_, he amused us much with
a description of the process of enrolling the militia then going
on; and droll pictures he drew of the peasantry who were brought
to him for that purpose every day by the _gens-d’armés_. It would
seem that these people were forced into the service sorely against
their will, being much attached to Buonaparte, and quite averse
to the new order of things. This seemed to be the general feeling
amongst the bourgeois of Dendermonde, as far as we could learn; and
it appeared very doubtful whether our worthy host himself, although
a public functionary under the new Government, did not participate
in this rage for Napoleon and Impérialisme. Be that, however, as it
may, he was so well pleased with our society, that the first cocks
crew ere he retired, his hiccoughing adieus and twinkling eye fully
demonstrating that, for him at least, the wine was not quite such
watery stuff as we had at first imagined. To us _port-drinkers_ it
was innocuous. The next day we had leisure to look about us, and
visit Dendermonde--a place, in my mind, inseparably connected with
Corporal Trim and Uncle Toby; and no little amusement was it to my
good Juge and his spouse when I related to them the story. They
thought it all true for a time.

Whilst my comrades sought the town, I turned to the country, which
for me has infinitely more charms. The steeple of a village church
peering above the trees about a mile from us, on the Brussels
road, attracted me in that direction. The opulent village of
Lebbeke, embowered in orchards, appeared peculiarly animated as I
approached it. White tents, horses at picket in long lines, groups
of artillerymen, peasants and their waggons bringing loads of hay,
intermingled amongst the apple-trees, enlivened the scene. Three
batteries of 9-pounders were parked in the orchards, and their people
partly billeted in the farms, partly encamped near their guns. It was
a curious medley of peace and war. Here a large barn by the roadside,
its doors thrown wide open, and peasants within busily occupied in
threshing, spoke of the former; the guns and their accompaniments in
the opposite orchard, of the latter--the horses, looking cool and
comfortable under the shade of a fine row of elms, quietly eating
their hay, or playfully biting each other. Gunners and drivers, half
undressed, were lounging about the tents, or sitting on the wall by
the roadside, contentedly smoking their pipes; others busy cleaning
their appointments, or raking up the hay in front of the horses.

Large, substantial-looking farm-houses principally formed the village
street, and by their comfortable appearance aroused the taste for
rural life; but this would be overset by the sight of an officer,
his coat unbuttoned, forage-cap on head, and cigar in mouth, lolling
listlessly out of a casement, as if perfectly at home--a sight
directly antagonistic to the tranquillity of rural retirement.
The Flemish waggons, with their teams and drivers, bringing loads
of hay, amused me much--long-bodied, and on low wheels, drawn by
four, and sometimes five, immense animals, overloaded with fat.
The waggoner, walking beside the fore-wheels, guides his team with
some dexterity by means of long reins of cord running through holes
in the haims. The horses are harnessed two and two, if the team
be of four--otherwise two in the wheel and three leaders abreast,
always separated from the wheelers by exceedingly long traces; the
pole invariably used. The richer farmers, as with us, affect great
show in their teams, the harness being gay with fringes and tassels
of coloured worsted, and the haims are always particularly fine.
These are of wood, flat, about four or five inches broad, the edges
frequently studded with brass nails, the front decorated with painted
flowers, and often with the Imperial eagle. The overgrown horses are
pampered like pet lapdogs, and never required to do one quarter of
the work they are capable of. They are noble brutes.

However rich the scenery of this country may be from its cultivation,
still, in an Englishman’s eye, there is something wanting. Except on
the pastures along the Dender, no cattle are ever seen animating the
fields. The absence of hedges or other fences obliges the farmer to
keep these shut up, except for a short period after the harvest, when
they are turned out to pick up what they can along the borders and on
the _trèf_ layers.

The quantity of manure accumulated by keeping them up is
considerable, and no doubt enters into the farmer’s calculation.
Sheep in small flocks (for I do not see that any large ones are kept)
are taken out to pasture by a shepherd and two or three dogs--not at
all resembling our sheep-dogs, except in sagacity, but small black
curs with long tails. I have seen one of these shepherds dozing
on a bank by the roadside, whilst his little flock, grazing in an
adjoining slip of grass-land, was quite as efficiently watched as if
the fellow had been wide awake. This slip was bounded on three sides
by young wheat, and on each of the dividing borders was posted one
of these curs. As the flock moved forward or backward so did the
dogs; and whilst they fed, these intelligent animals kept incessantly
running backwards and forwards on their post like sentinels,
instantly darting at any sheep that attempted to break bounds, and
driving it back into the grass-plot. The day was exceedingly warm,
and their lolling tongues proclaimed that the little animals had no
very light task of it, whatever their master’s might be.

The town of Dendermonde (of which I saw but little) is situated
on the right bank of the Scheldt, at the point where the little
river Dender flows into it, as the name imports--Dender mond or
mund--_Dender mouth_. This river flows through it, and, being
backed up by sluices, forms the basin I noticed on the day of our
arrival. It is not large, and its population might be about 5000 or
6000--manufacturers of linens, fustians, &c. &c. The fortifications
have nearly disappeared, the only remnant that I saw being something
like a ravelin on the Alost side. It is, however, so surrounded by
water, and the country is so flat, that an extensive inundation could
soon be formed to supply their place if necessary. The general
aspect of the town is mean and gloomy, but on the side next to St
Gille were several good-looking houses, though all built of the same
dark stone. We saw here more pretty women, however, than we had yet
met with, always excepting in Zêle.




CHAPTER VI.


Finding all quiet, and that our move hither from Ghent had only
been for the purpose of bringing us nearer to the cavalry, whose
headquarters were at Ninove, and into a more abundant country for
forage, we now gave ourselves up to the amusements our situation
afforded, as much as the requisite attention to military duties would
allow. Some made excursions to Brussels and Antwerp; some passed
their mornings knocking about the balls at a miserable billiard-table
upon the rickety floor of an up-stairs room in a neighbouring
cabaret; whilst others made a sort of flirting acquaintance with some
of the fair damsels of Dendermonde. The time flew quickly, because we
were happy.

I was anxious to see Antwerp, and proposed going thither; but day
after day something occurred to prevent me, and at last I had the
mortifying reflection of having passed six idle days within eighteen
miles of it, and yet never been there. My only excursion was to
Alost, or Aulst, as they call it. On the 28th Leathes and I set off
on this expedition. Until within a mile of Alost, the character of
the country we traversed was much the same as that about Dendermonde,
but the villages and farm-houses were less neat and more poor in
their appearance--ragged thatch instead of slates and tiles, &c.--and
the streets of the villages or hamlets narrower and dirtier. During
the whole ride we saw but one house that appeared the residence of
a gentleman, and that was a large heavy-looking brick building,
standing in the midst of an old-fashioned garden, ornamented (if so
it may be called) with painted statues of men and monsters quite in
the Cockney style. _En effet_, this was the _lusthause_ of a wealthy
_bourgmestre_ of the Ville de Gand. Approaching Alost, we found the
character of the country changing, and having seen nothing but a
dead level ever since landing at Ostend, were agreeably surprised
at finding ourselves ascending a gentle slope, and surrounded by a
gently undulating country, yet so slightly so that we were not aware
of it until on it. Passing a sort of advanced barrier, we soon
reached the town, and rode into a respectable sort of square, where
we dismounted at the Maison d’Autriche. No accommodation for horses
here, so we were obliged to resort to a carrier’s in an adjoining
street, where we with difficulty got stable-room, all being crowded
with horses of Louis XVIII.’s cavalry. Being tired when I returned
to Dendermonde, I made no note of my visit to Aulst, and therefore
can say little about it. All I remember is a fine broad street of
handsome houses running up an ascent; a pretty public walk (_en
berceau_) called L’Allée d’Amour (as we should say, _Love Lane_; and
what town or village is there in England which has not its Allée
d’Amour?); a fine church, in which was a series of paintings (good,
I believe) representing the life and adventures of some saint; the
canal harbour, full of boats laden with corn and hay for our cavalry,
the contractors having established here their grand depôt, &c. &c.;
great crowding and bustling in the streets, occasioned partly by this
circumstance, partly by the presence of the Duc de Berri and his
troops, and partly by an unusual influx of travellers. Moreover, I
remember that we got a most delicious omelet and bottle of very fine
Sauterne at the Maison d’Autriche, for which (_garçon_ included) we
paid only five francs; whilst, _en revanche_, as it were, we had to
pay eight to the villain of a carrier for the feed of bad oats which
our horses would not eat; that we saddled them ourselves, and sallied
from Alost, expecting, in due time and without _contre-temps_, to
reach St Gille; that we actually arrived within a mile of Lebbeke,
the spire of whose church was closely seen by us above the trees,
and towards which we attempted a short cut, which attempt ended in
losing ourselves, and wandering about for an hour within 800 yards
of St Gille, and always with the spire of Lebbeke in view, without
being able to reach one place or the other; and that there we might
have wandered till doomsday, had we not fortunately fallen in with a
patrol (foot) of _gens-d’armés_, who put us into the right way--such
is the intricacy of this country, intersected as it is by lanes and
ditches, like network, and the view confined to the neighbouring
field by the multitudinous little woods. We got home! _Chez moi_,
things went on so comfortably that I was quite happy, my worthy host
and his spouse treating me and mine quite as part of the family.
Of Monsieur, however, I did not see very much, for every morning,
immediately after breakfast, he went to his office in Dendermonde,
where he remained all day, and he never ventured another soirée
with our party. The last year (1814) my position in their _ménage_
had been occupied by a French colonel, of whom they spoke in the
highest terms, always winding up with, “Ah! il était brave garçon,
celui là.” When taking leave of them, which the approach of English
troops rendered necessary, he added to his adieux, “Mais pour l’année
prochaine;” and both these good people confidently expected to see
him again, setting it down as certain that the moment the Emperor
advanced the English would hasten to their ships, never dreaming that
we could resist _him_. So slipped time away, and my present comfort
approached its end.

_May 1st._--I still slept, when, at five o’clock in the morning,
our sergeant-major aroused me to read a note brought by an orderly
hussar. It was most laconic--_la voici_: “Captain Mercer’s troop of
horse-artillery will march to Strytem without delay. Signed,” &c. &c.

Where is Strytem? and for what this sudden move? These were questions
to which I could get no answer. The hussar knew nothing, and the
people about me less. One thing was positive, and that was, that
we must be under weigh instanter, and pick out Strytem as best
we might. The sergeant-major, therefore, was despatched to give
the alert; and having given the hussar a receipt in full for his
important despatch, I proceeded to clothe my person for the journey,
having hitherto been _en chemise_. As the trumpeter was lodged in
a house close by with my own grooms, the “boot-and-saddle” quickly
reverberated through the village, and set its whole population
in movement. A gentle tap at my door announced a visitor. What
was my surprise on opening it!--there was Madame la Juge _tout en
déshabillé_, evidently just tumbled out of bed, and apparently much
agitated. Such a scene I did not expect.

“Ah, Monsieur, vous allez partis!” and she actually began to sob and
cry like a child. Was she serious, or was this acting? If the latter,
she certainly played her part so well that I could not but give her
credit for being in earnest. It is so delightful to believe one’s
self interesting to a fine woman. Advancing my toilette, I tried at
the same time to moderate this outbreak of feeling. She only wept
the more. Meantime M. le Juge arrived on the stage, his old blue
frock carelessly thrown on, and his nether garment occupying both his
hands, one holding it up, and the other arranging it, the eternal
green cap stuck on his head, hardly yet quite awake--unwashed,
uncombed: the good man did not present the most amiable figure by the
side of his neat consort.

Our people were not accustomed to delay, and the road in front of
the house was already a scene of bustle from the assembling of the
detachments lying nearer home. Although still lachrymose, Madame did
not stand idle; but, seeing my servant sufficiently employed packing
my portmanteau, set about preparing breakfast, to which I soon sat
down, whilst the worthy couple waited on me, recommending this and
that, and pressing me to eat, much in the manner of two fond parents
hanging over the early meal of their darling boy, about to return to
school by the expected coach. I could not but feel grateful for so
much kindness, and consequently sorrow at so soon leaving them; and
so this breakfast was rather a melancholy one, although the morning
sun did shine so bright. The good people were unceasing in their
regrets, and repeatedly made me promise that, if I remained in the
country, I would pay them another visit--a promise I was never able
to fulfil, however.

To my questions respecting Strytem, Monsieur could give no
satisfactory answers. “It lay in a very fine country, somewhere in
the neighbourhood of Brussels; and we had better take the road to
that city in the first instance, and trust for further information to
the peasantry as we went along.”

These people are singularly ignorant in this respect, having no
knowledge, generally speaking, of any place more than two or three
miles from home. Monsieur, however, invited me to follow him to his
study--a small room all in a litter--over the gateway, and there,
after some hunting amongst books, old clothes, &c. &c., he rummaged
out the mutilated fragment of an old but very excellent map, which he
insisted on my putting into my _sabretache_, which I did, and still
keep for his sake.

At length the moment of departure arrived, the parade was formed, my
horse at the door. The tears of Madame flowed afresh as she embraced
me. Monsieur led me by the hand to the gateway. Here the great
coarse Flemish cook, the corner of her apron applied to her eyes,
for she also wept (at the departure of my groom, I suspect), came
running out, her clumsy _sabots_ with their trimmings of rabbit skin
clattering along the stone passage like the hoofs of a cart-horse.
My servant had made her a present for her assistance, in her eyes
so magnificent that she could hardly express her gratitude, and so
poured on me a shower of thanks and blessings, and recommendations to
the protection of saints and saintesses, with a volubility which her
usual taciturn, phlegmatic manner had not led me to expect. “_Prepare
to mount!_” “_Mount!_” The trumpets sound a march, and waiving a last
adieu to the group at the gate of my late home, I turn my back on it
for ever, perhaps. The men were in high spirits, and horses fat as
pigs and sleek as moles--thanks to rest, good stabling, and abundance
of _trèf_. Most of the peasants on whom many of our men had been
billeted accompanied them to the parade, and it was interesting to
witness the kindness with which they shook hands at parting, and the
complacency with which, patting the horses on the neck, they scanned
them all over, as if proud of their good condition. And yet these
were Napoleonists, according to our Juge. For my part, I believe they
were utterly indifferent as to whether they lived under the rule
of Napoleon or the house of Orange, so long as their agricultural
labours were not interrupted: and this alone, I suspect, was the
cause of their aversion to being militiamen.

Passing through Lebbeke, we found the three brigades of 9-pounders
also getting on march, and the whole village astir. The officers told
us their orders were to march direct to Brussels, and they were
fully persuaded the French army had advanced.

For about seven miles the road lay through a country differing
little from what we had hitherto seen; but then it became suddenly
hilly. Ascending the first long but not very steep ascent, we were
assailed by a host of beggars, who had stationed themselves here to
take advantage of the slow pace at which carriages were obliged to
ascend the hill. These were the first I recollect having seen in the
country. The ragged boys accompanied the column to the top of the
hill, endeavouring to excite, if not compassion, at least admiration
of the agility with which they rolled themselves along alternately on
hands and feet, like so many wheels--a feat that procured them some
coppers.

The country had now totally changed its character; still fertile,
highly cultivated, and abundantly populous, yet presenting scenery of
a much more interesting nature. Fine swells enabled one to obtain,
from time to time, most charming views of the rich distance, instead
of, as hitherto, being confined to a few hundred yards of meadow,
shut up, as the flat country was, by trees and small copses.

Villages and large farms appeared in all directions, intermingled
with extensive woods; the fields exhibited the richest exuberance of
crops--wheat, rye, hops, buckwheat, &c., with their lighter tints
relieving the more sombre tones of the woodlands. Here the spire of
a village church, there the conical roofs and quaint architecture
of a chateau, peered above the foliage of the woods, and increased
the interest of the scene. To me this change was delightful. I
thought I had never seen anything half so rich as the fine landscape
spread before me when I turned to look back on gaining the first
summit. The height, however, was not sufficient to allow me, at
this distance, in a country so thickly wooded, to see Dendermonde
again, though my eye eagerly sought it. The large village of Assche
(town, I should call it, being marked bourg in the map) crowned
this hill, and here we found a battery of Belgian Horse-Artillery
in quarters. The men lounging about in undress, or without their
jackets, without any appearance of a move, induced us to believe
our own was, after all, only another change of quarters--and we
were right. The people here knew Strytem, which they said was only
a few miles distant, to the southward of the road we were on.
Accordingly I despatched an officer to precede us, and make the
necessary arrangements for our reception; at the same time quitting
the chaussée, we plunged into a villanous cross-road, all up and
down, and every bottom occupied by a stream crossed by bridges of
loose planks, which to us were rather annoying from their apparent
insecurity, as well as from the boggy state of the ground for some
yards at either end of them. However, if the road was bad, the beauty
of the country through which it led made ample amends. Descending
from the hill on which Assche is situated, we travelled for two or
three miles through a bottom, between two nearly parallel ridges,
whose slopes exhibited all the luxuriance of vegetation in splendid
crops of grain, &c., and magnificent trees, so peculiar to this
country, whilst an almost continued wood occupied their summits.
This part of our route reminded me strongly of the valley in which
High-Wycombe lies, though there nothing like this exuberance is
seen. About a mile, as it proved, from Strytem, for we had not as
yet seen anything like a village, we ascended the hill again, and
were continuing along the summit when a peasant, in blue smock-frock
and white night-cap, came running after us with a scrap of paper
in his hand, which he presented to me with a most profound bow,
doffing at the same time his dirty cap. A few lines in pencil from
Dr Bell informed me that the bearer would lead us to Strytem; and
he by signs--for he spoke no French--gave us to understand that we
must turn back, having passed the road leading thither. Accordingly
a countermarch, by unlimbering, took place, and, following our
guide, we descended into a most secluded little valley, green and
lovely, the bottom being principally meadow, everywhere surrounded
by stately elms. The road, however, became worse than ever--deep
tenacious mud, sadly broken up. After marching a short distance we
passed a wheel-wright’s shop; then came to a broader space, where
stood a small mean-looking church, a miserable cabaret, a forge,
two very large farm establishments, with a few wretched-looking
cottages;--this, our guide gave us to understand, was Strytem. Bell’s
note spoke of a chateau at the point we were to make for, but here
was nothing of the sort. All seemed disappointment, for the miserable
place itself was so different from the fine spacious streets and
substantial houses of all the villages we had hitherto seen, that
one could scarcely imagine it to be the same country. Our guide,
however, led on, and after passing this poor collection of dwellings,
a high stone wall bounding the road to the left, with a wide gateway
in the centre, announced the chateau, which was so completely shut
in by the woods, &c., that the first glimpse we got of it was on
entering these gates. A spacious green court sloped down to the
building, a dreary-looking old pile of brick, forming three sides
of a square, and surrounded by a broad moat--nearly as green as the
court, from the aquatic weeds floating on its stagnant water. Arched
doors; high but narrow windows, composed of small panes set in lead,
and encased in heavy stone frames; lofty stepped gables, and a tower
occupying one angle of the court, with a conical roof surmounted by
an iron cross and weather-cock, gave it a most venerable and somewhat
imposing aspect. The sombre effect, however, was in some measure
relieved by the lively tints of roses and rich verdure of the broad
leaves of a vine trained over a trellis along the edge of the moat,
as well as the fine fruit-trees everywhere covering the walls of the
front court. A broad gravel-drive descended to the moat, which was
crossed by a stone bridge, substantial, but not ornamental. On our
right were stables, &c., for about half-way down the court; on the
left the enormous roofs of barns and farm-buildings appeared over
the wall, and beyond them, again, the rather inelegant spire of the
village church. An arched doorway communicated on this side with the
farmyard. Behind the chateau the view was bounded by the tufted and
feathery masses of a superb avenue of beeches and a hill covered
with wood seen through the few openings between them, relieving well
the reddish sombre tone and formal outlines of the building. Every
feature of this place is strongly impressed on my memory as I then
beheld it for the first time, not without emotions of disgust; for
though rather a picturesque object to look at, I could not suppress a
shudder at the idea of its becoming my habitation for an indefinite
time. Nothing do I regret more than not having made a sketch of it
from this side, although I did several from other points.

The road was so narrow, and the turn so sharp, that it required all
the dexterity of our drivers to get decently into the court with
their six-horse teams. They did, however, effect it without carrying
away the gate-posts, to the no small amazement of some half-dozen
boors, whom the novelty of arrival had drawn together, and we
finally formed a very compact little park, three pieces and their
ammunition-waggons on each side of the central path. The _corps de
garde_ was established in the loft over the stables in which were
lodged the officers’ horses; and the rest of the troop were billeted
on the neighbouring farms, which, in general, were so large that they
took a subdivision, or thirty-two horses, each, and, if I mistake
not, that adjoining the chateau a whole division of sixty-four
horses. Having despatched this business, we proceeded to examine
our own quarters. The old gardener, a tall meagre figure, with a
venerable grey head and good-humoured physiognomy, but somewhat bent
by age, accompanied by his daughter, a pale melancholy-looking young
woman, met us on the bridge, the keys of his fortalice in one hand
and his dirty _bonnet de nuit_ in the other. (Be it here remarked
that although neatness and cleanliness characterise the dwellings of
the Flemish peasantry, yet are they not over and above particular in
this respect as regards their own persons.) As he could speak nothing
but Flemish, Mademoiselle came to officiate as his interpreter, but
the _patois_ in which she expressed herself was so unintelligible
that, after listening for some time to her long-winded story, and
comprehending nothing more of it than the constantly-recurring “Mon
père dit,” &c., our politeness gave way, and we begged that the
doors might be forthwith thrown open. The burden of her song or
chant, for such it was, seemed to be an endeavour to dissuade us from
our purpose of lodging there, though I could not well comprehend why.
Leaving, then, the good man to replace his bonnet, and Mademoiselle
to explain to him something or another, we proceeded to examine
the interior, in order to select our rooms. The chateau had been
uninhabited for many years, and, though not ruinous, was in a very
dilapidated state. Nothing could be more chillingly repulsive than
the vast flagged hall into which we first entered. Several doors led
from this, right and left, into suites of apartments, and one, low
and arched, opposite the entrance, opened on a long bridge leading
over the moat to the garden and pleasure-grounds, &c. This hall was
totally devoid of furniture. We found the rooms on the ground-floor
large, lofty, and of good proportions, but only feebly illuminated
by high windows sunk deep in the wall, and of which the heavy stone
mullions intercepted nearly as much light as entered between them.
The walls were hung with tapestry so ancient and so much decayed that
the figures, landscapes, &c., by which it had once been ornamented,
were nearly obliterated. In some rooms old family portraits occupied
the places of the wainscot panels, particularly over the doors. The
only furniture in any of them was a few ponderous tables, and some
high-backed equally ponderous chairs, having both seats and backs
stuffed and covered with tapestry. On the floor above, a large
corridor or hall--for it was directly over and corresponded in size
with the one below--was hung round with full-length portraits of the
Van Volden family (to whom the domain belonged), male and female.
Some of these were common enough; but there were others evidently the
production of no ordinary pencil--one in particular, a lady habited
in a costume such as prevailed about our Charles II.’s time--a
splendidly beautiful creature of some two or three and twenty years
of age, painted in a most masterly style; and, from being in a much
more magnificent frame than any of the others, apparently a person
of higher consideration. “_Mon-père-dit_” (as we had christened the
gardener’s pallid daughter), who accompanied us through the rooms,
could give no information respecting this fair dame--all she knew
was that she had been a person of very high rank, and, she believed,
an ancestress of Madame la Baronne, the present proprietress. By
the way, Madame Van Volden, Baronne Von Lombeke et Strytem (such
were her titles), was at this time residing in Brussels, where she
had a grand mansion--Rue de Dominicans. She possessed also another
estate at or near Vilvorde, between which and her town residence she
divided her time, so that her Strytem tenants saw her very rarely.
Her son, being _maire_ of the commune, paid an occasional visit to
the village, but then always put up at the farmhouse, so that the
chateau had long been locked up and quite neglected. To return from
this digression. Having visited the upper apartments, all which were
as dismal as those below, we proceeded to choose our quarters, much
to the chagrin of Mademoiselle _Mon-père-dit_, who had, no doubt,
entertained hopes that the repulsive appearance of things would have
deterred us from taking up our residence there. I selected a large
salon, immediately off the hall, on the ground-floor. It might have
been about 30 feet by 26 or 28, very lofty, with an immense gaping
fireplace, but without grate. Two great stone-cased windows looked
into the front court, a third across the moat and towards the woods
behind the chateau. There were three visible doors--the one leading
into the great hall, a second into a sort of vestibule or small hall,
whence a staircase ascended to the apartments of the right wing,
and the third into a long, narrow, but lofty room, in one corner of
which I placed my mattress on an old settee. There was also a door
from this room into the vestibule, and beyond that another suite of
apartments, in which our surgeon established himself. The walls of
my salon, like most of the others, were covered with tapestry, and
in the compartments between the windows, over the doors, &c., were
grim-looking portraits of _ci-devant_ Van Voldens, each having the
name and date inscribed at the bottom of it, from which I learned
that most of them were of considerable antiquity; some, I think,
dating 1537.

I have said that there were three _visible_ doors to this room. I
had been in it some time ere, by accident, I discovered a fourth,
concealed under the tapestry, leading into a very small chapel fitted
up with great neatness (except the altar, which was rather gaudy),
and evidently the only part of the mansion of which any care had
been taken. Such was my new domicile, in which I was soon at home,
although it contrasted as strongly with my late cheerful apartment
at Dendermonde as that did with the gloomy hole at Ghent. Some of
our people found a similar contrast, and could not refrain from
grumbling. “By the Lord, gentlemen,” said old Lieutenant Ingleby,
“you ought to think yourselves very fortunate in getting such a
quarter. In the Peninsula the Duke himself would have thought so, and
was often glad to get so good a roof over his head.” The grumblers
were ashamed, and we heard no more of it. A large salon in the left
wing we chose for our mess-room, and the other officers established
themselves up-stairs. Fires were soon lighted above and below;
servants running up and down;--all was life and movement, and the old
place had not been so gay for years before. Indeed, on returning to
my room after visiting the billets, there was an appearance of home
and comfort about it which I did not expect. A large wood-fire blazed
and crackled in the great chimney. My servant had collected chairs
enough to make a show, ranged round the walls; on one of the great
antique tables in the centre he had placed my writing apparatus and
one or two books, together with a map of the Pays Bas I had brought
from Ghent, in the anticipation of country quarters. Clean linen
was airing over the back of one of the tapestry chairs, with other
preparations for dressing for dinner; whilst coiled up near the
blazing hearth lay my old faithful dog and constant companion for the
last ten years.

Our mess-room was as much changed, and the preparations for dinner
had given it quite another air to what it had when first seen. Like
most of the others, it was spacious, but, unlike them, inasmuch as
the windows down to the floor were in the modern French style. Of
these there were only two--one looking over the garden and woods,
the other over a small field or lawn, bounded on two of its sides
by double rows of noble beeches, and on the other two (round which
ran the road or lane leading to Brussels) by orchards, hop-grounds,
&c. &c. Each had an old iron balcony, so rust-eaten that they seemed
ready to drop into the water of the moat which lay below them. Over
the elaborately carved antique-looking chimney-piece was a large
painting of a castle, with a number of men apparently employed
clearing the ditch. The floor had been swept, chairs and tables
collected from different parts of the house, and one of the latter
covered by a clean table-cloth, and our canteen apparatus laid out
for dinner--the whole looking so much more comfortable than we
expected, that even our grumblers voted the old chateau not so bad
after all, as they sat themselves down to the well-covered board. For
the feast, not a despicable one, as well as the arrangement of the
salon, we were indebted to the indefatigable activity and unrivalled
skill of our friend Karl--a worthy whom I have not yet introduced;
so, by way of episode, whilst we are enjoying the good viands of his
preparation, let me do so.

On the memorable night of our landing at Ostend, whilst standing
on the sands, I was accosted by a very handsome youth of about
eighteen or twenty, who asked if I wanted a servant. His costume
indicated that he meant himself, for he wore a green livery-coat
with red cuffs and collar, and a glazed hat with a cockade in it.
His history was, that he had lived some time with General Vandamme,
and had accompanied him to Moscow; but on returning into Saxony,
although he had been a great favourite with the General, this noble
personage one day deserted him most unexpectedly, leaving him,
not only without money, but also without a prospect of recovering
the long arrears of wages due to him--[there was a mystery in
this part of the story]--and after vainly waiting in hopes still
that the General might return or send for him, he had set out and
found his way thus far towards France, when the chance of getting
employment amongst _les officiers Anglais_ (and no doubt some of
their _guinées_) had occurred to him, and I was the first he had
addressed. His figure was rather under the middle size, extremely
well made; face beautiful, and address perfect. Moreover, according
to his own account, he was a pearl without price. He could speak five
or six languages, and cook, cut and dress hair, and a thousand other
things I have forgotten; but the great recommendation was a talent
he had acquired, when with the French army, of _discovering_ and
_appropriating_ the resources of a country--Anglicé, _plundering_.
If Monsieur would but try him, he would find him so attentive, so
faithful. For his part, he was sure he should soon love Monsieur--his
countenance was so amiable. All would not do--I rejected him; but
Leathes took a liking to and engaged him. So thenceforth he became
one of us, and soon a general favourite; for although he had sounded
his own trumpet, he had nowise exaggerated his qualifications, nor
even told us all, for in addition he was the merriest and most
kind-hearted creature I ever met with. He had an inexhaustible fund
of stories and songs, and sang beautifully, and in a most sweet and
melodious voice; was an admirable mimic, and amongst other things
mimicked so well two flutes, that one day, at Strytem, sitting
smoking my cigar on the parapet of the bridge, I actually made
sure two people were playing a duet in the kitchen; but upon going
thither, found only Karl, who, seated on a table, was warbling out a
favourite waltz, like a robin on the house-top.

Our language he had soon added to his stock, and being now a
tolerable proficient, and evidently so well suited for the office,
we had at once nominated him major-domo (spite of his youth) this
morning on arriving, and placed all the other servants under
his directions. But although understanding and speaking English
sufficiently for all common purposes, and to communicate with the
other servants, he never would address any of us but in French.
To return again to the course of our narrative. Our cheerful meal
had been discussed with many an encomium on the provider, and the
circulation of the bottle had already produced a genial exhilaration
amongst our party, when the door was abruptly thrown open, and in
rushed our friend Karl, holding his sides, and unable to speak for
laughter. “Why, Karl, what the devil’s the matter now?” “C’est
l’adjoint, monsieur, qui demande à vous parler.” “Well, what of that?
Is there anything very comical in this visit?”--“Excusez, monsieur,
il est si drôl--est ce que je lui ferai entrer, monsieur,” and the
merry young dog tried to compose his features. I was about to go out
to meet this functionary and learn his business, but the whole mess
cried out with one voice to bring him in--curiosity being excited by
Karl’s obstreperous laughter; so I desired him to be admitted. Karl
soon returned, ushering in with most ludicrous gravity the worthy
_maire_ and his cortège (for it appeared he had not come alone), who,
each as he crossed the threshold, making a profound salaam, followed
his leader until they were all drawn up in line across the end of
the room. The appearance of the party was certainly comic, and for
a few moments we contemplated each other in silent amazement. The
principal figure of this group--he on the right of the line, Mynheer
Jan Evenpoel, _adjoint-maire_--was a short, fat, square-built man,
with a head like a pumpkin deeply set (_zabullida_, the Spaniards
would say) between his broad high shoulders; countenance stolidity
itself; little pig-eyes, half hid in the swell of his fat cheeks and
the thick overhanging brow; nose pudsy, resembling a lump of brown
clay thrown against his face more than a nose; a monstrous wide
(now half-open) mouth, showing within a row of fangs standing apart
like palisades; a great fat dew-lap; the whole phiz finished by
two enormous projecting ears. Such was the object that had excited
so powerfully the risible faculties of young Karl. Our silent gaze
seemed to paralyse him. There he stood, evidently endeavouring to
assume some sort of an air of office, but trembling visibly, and as
visibly perspiring from his extreme nervousness, twirling his hat in
his hand, looking timidly, first at me, then at the formidable party
round the table, then inquiringly glancing at his own party. The
poor man’s evident anxiety must have excited pity, had it not more
forcibly excited our risibility, as well as that of Karl.

Three peasants, heavy-looking men, with somewhat more intelligence
in their countenances, yet decidedly equally alarmed, arranged
themselves next to Mynheer Evenpoel. These, as well as their
chief, were all arrayed in their roast-beef suits--jackets of
cotton, unmentionables of black or bottle-green velveteen,
blue-and-white-striped cotton stockings, clumsy silver knee and
shoe buckles,--such was their costume. The eternal _bonnet de nuit_
for this time had given place to rather smart round hats, with a
profusion of plush on them. Drawn up on their left stood the old
gardener, his two sons--stout peasants, clad something like, though
more humbly than, the rest--and Mademoiselle “_Mon-père-dit_,” also
in her best bib and tucker, trying to look amiable, but evidently
most particularly anxious. Lastly, with a brisk, self-satisfied
air, stepped in one of the most extraordinary-looking personages of
the whole party--a diminutive spare figure with a complexion like
mahogany, but upright, and of a most martial bearing. He was clad
in a short green uniform coat, with large copper buttons decorated
with the imperial eagle of France, green pantaloons, and an enormous
leathern cocked-hat, which he touched by way of salute on entering,
but, soldier-like, retained on his head. In his hand he carried a
sort of javelin, or short hunting-spear. This dignitary, a person of
most decided importance, passing the others, stepped briskly up and
placed himself at the elbow of the trembling magistrate, who drew a
long breath, and gave unequivocal testimony of satisfaction at seeing
his tutelary genius by his side.

The important personage just described was the _garde-champêtre_--or
_garde-village_, as he was more frequently called--a sort of police
officer placed by Napoleon in every village of his empire. I never
could ascertain precisely the position and duties of these people;
they seemed to be chief police officers, and the _maires_ paid them
great deference, seldom acting in extraordinary cases without their
advice and concurrence. They acted as gamekeepers and constables,
billeted troops, and exercised a general surveillance in the commune.
No doubt they noted and made reports of all they saw and heard, so
that H. I. Majesty had an authorised spy in every village. They were
well paid, and the situation appeared to be a comfortable retreat
for old soldiers, for such we always found them to be. Our present
friend (called familiarly by the peasantry Petit Jean) had served
in a regiment of the line under Marshal Suchet in Catalonia, and
although still only a middle-aged man, had been pensioned on account
of having lost two fingers of his left hand, and placed here for life
as _garde-village_. Well, the whole cortège has entered the room,
and ranged themselves in line across the lower end of it, close to
the wall; the shuffling of feet has ceased, and a profound silence
prevails. We sit staring at them, and wondering what the deuce
they interrupt us for. Bowing and scraping renewed spontaneously;
again silence, but various glances are shot at and signs made to
Mynheer Evenpoel, which in his fright he utterly disregards, and
stands like an owl, without a movement except the evident shaking
of his limbs. After a while old Ingleby, who had been leaning over
the back of his chair eyeing the poor devil, utters in his usual
gruff Yorkshire way, “_Well, sir?_” without reflecting on the fact
of his English not being understood. The tone is enough, however,
and it determines the party to bolder measures--the quaking magnate
is actually shoved forward to the table. Petit Jean also advances,
and again places himself at the poor man’s elbow; his right arm,
outstretched, bears upon the upright javelin, the butt of which
he plants firmly, and with an air, on the floor; in his mutilated
left hand he holds up to us an unfolded sheet of foolscap, which
we soon ascertain to be inscribed by certain characters calculated
to extract hay and corn, &c., from the lofts and granaries of our
clients--in short, the requisition for forage and provisions, &c.,
of our quartermaster-general addressed to the commune of Strytem.
The brown little warrior looks complacently round the company
as though he would say, “And I also am a soldier; _Moi!_” After
repeated applications of a very scanty blue cotton handkerchief to
his front--_pour essuyer la sueur_--the worthy magistrate at length,
in a trembling, hesitating voice, opens his oration, gains courage
as he goes on, warms, and even becomes rather energetic towards
the conclusion of nearly a quarter of an hour’s talk, to which we
have listened, but understood not a word. Mynheer salaams, wipes
his front, and stands, mouth half-open, attending the applause
due to his exertions, and our reply to his statements, whatever
they may be. Petit Jean comprehends the dilemma, steps forward
with a military salute, places himself again in an attitude, and,
whilst Mynheer stares and seems to envy his self-possession,
requests permission of messieurs les officiers to explain what M.
l’Adjoint would wish to say, and goes off at score--“M. Evenpoel
only expresses the sentiments of the whole commune when he assures
messieurs les officiers that the arrival of the brave English has
diffused throughout its population the most lively joy. Les Anglais
are a people as generous as they are brave, and M. l’Adjoint rests
satisfied that under the protection of M. le Commandant the peaceful
tranquillity of the commune will remain undisturbed.” Here, at a
glance from Petit Jean, M. Evenpoel and the whole cortège salaam
together, repeating with one consent, “Mais c’est vrai--c’est vrai!
Oui, M. le Commandant, c’est vrai çà!” Petit Jean resumes. “_But_,
M. le Commandant, we sensibly regret the poverty of our commune,
and are _au déséspoir_ that Milor Wellington should have sent his
brave soldiers to so miserable a place--a place so incapable of
affording them the good cheer (bon traitement) that they so richly
merit, whilst the surrounding country abounds in rich and populous
villages, fully adequate to lodge them comfortably (convenablement)
and to supply all their wants. It was only _l’année passée_ that
this poor commune was oppressed and impoverished by being obliged
to provide for a corps of Prussians during several months. These
people, undisciplined and _bien méchants_, plundered us all without
restraint, and wantonly consumed our whole substance--hardly leaving
wherewithal to support our miserable existence. Thus ruined and
impoverished, M. le Commandant, we feel assured, will see that, in
spite of our good wishes, we are in an impossibility of supplying the
immense rations of forage, &c., here demanded;” and here, taking off
his chapeau and making a most profound salaam, he again flourishes
before us the obnoxious sheet of foolscap, whilst M. l’Adjoint,
beginning to fidget, indicates an inclination to renew his harangue
amidst a general buzz of approbation, and a reiteration of “C’est
vrai, mon commandant, c’est bien vrai.” M. le Commandant silences
them by observing, “That a soldier must obey orders--that it is
for his general to think and investigate--that Milor Wellington,
or those acting for him, had no doubt sufficiently informed
themselves as to the resources of the country before they ordered
troops thither--that, having done so, right or wrong, these troops
must live--that it is evident from the good case of all present,
particularly of M. le Maire, that the commune did produce something
to eat and drink;--consequently, the gentlemen are invited to allow
our partaking with them, or we must help ourselves, which would be
bien facheux.” A general grunt--“Ah, mon Dieu!”--accompanied by
deep sighs on the part of Mademoiselle “_Mon-père-dit_.” I should
have stated that M. le Maire and a farmer named Walsdragen were the
only two ignorant of French. The former of these had profited by
an offered chair, and seated himself during the oration of Petit
Jean and my answer. Hearing the concert of sighs and groans, he
opens his little pig-eyes to the utmost, and casting them about on
the surrounding group, seems to demand an explanation. Petit Jean
communicates the awful purport of my answer. Agitation recommences,
and I am conjured, for pity’s sake, at least to delay until an
express be sent to Brussels to acquaint Milor Vellington of the
utter impossibility of so large a body of men and horses being
supported by so poor a place. Poor simple people! I should like
to have witnessed the reception of the delegate. M. le Commandant
observes that M. le Maire may do as to him seemeth best, but cannot
be so unreasonable as to expect that we and our horses should wait
for supper until his messenger return--ergo, as it is already late,
M. le Maire is again invited to lose no more time in talking, but
to proceed forthwith in collecting the articles demanded. But, to
make a long story short, after a deal of action and whispering in
a corner of the room, they made a proposition to furnish one-half
the quantity. And here it flashed across me, that these people must
be dealt with like the Turkish rayah, who, after protesting his
incapability to produce a single egg for a whole hour, at last, upon
the application of the Mikmander’s whip, brings out a whole store
of good things. So I cut the matter short by sending Karl for the
quartermaster, who was without awaiting the result of the Maire’s
visit. The old veteran enters, head erect, shoulders thrown back, and
steel scabbard jangling on the floor as he advanced to the table, and
silently made his salute. The assembled rustics gape and stare at him
in evident alarm, Mynheer trembles, Petit Jean draws himself up,
as if imitating old Hall’s military bearing, whilst I, pointing him
out to the assembled multitude, inform them that in five minutes he
will proceed at the head of a foraging-party to rummage their barns,
granaries, and larders, and help himself. The quartermaster, having
received his orders, makes his salute, without deigning even a glance
at the Maire and party, amongst whom a precious scene of confusion
now takes place, amidst which out they all trundle after old Hall,
without even the ceremony of a parting salaam; and we, replenishing
our glasses, drank success to our foray, rejoicing in having got
rid of the noise. Our quiet, however, was of very short duration,
for in the court Hall was already assembling his party, and neither
understood their remonstrances nor attended to their grimaces; so
with one accord back they came upon us, bursting into the room as
unceremoniously as they had just left it, bellowing like so many
bulls. A new negotiation opened, and terminated with a promise that
everything should be brought in if I would give them _two hours_,
after they had vainly struggled for daybreak--and away they went.
The two hours had nearly elapsed, and we were still at table, when
Petit Jean, foaming with rage, burst into the room unaccompanied:
“Ah, mais ces faquins là bas--ils ne font que se moquer de vous et
de votre bonté, Monsieur le Commandant. Mais excusez, monsieur, je
suis militaire, moi! et je me suis indigne de voir des militaires se
laisser tromper par des vilains paysans; qui qu’ils sont, connaissent
très bien l’accueil q’ils auraient reçus à la main d’un officier
Prussien, ou même Français. Avec permission, monsieur, je m’en vais
amener avec moi vos fourrageurs faire un fourrage militairement;”
and, without waiting for an answer, the little hero bolted, and
following to the hall-door, there we saw him sure enough march out of
the gate perched upon one of our immense gun-horses, looking for all
the world like a monkey on a dromedary. In two hours bread, forage,
and all--nay, more than we had demanded--were brought in.

Meantime our sergeant of the guard comes in for orders as to what he
shall do with the mayor. “The mayor?--what have you to do with the
mayor?” “Why, we have him safe in the guard-room, sir.” “The devil
you have! and by whose order?” “Why, sir, we thought it best to keep
him until the foraging-party with _Pitty Jan_ returned, least he
might try to hinder ’em.” Here was a dilemma, should the old man
complain to headquarters. However, on sending an officer to release
him, and explain the mistake, Mynheer was too frightened to think of
anything but rejoicing at gaining his liberty. Perhaps conscience
told him that he deserved punishment for the imposition he had
attempted to practise on us.

Petit Jean from that moment became our great friend and ally. On
almost all occasions he sided with the soldiers in any little
difference between them and the boors. On one occasion a complaint
had been made to me, by a man who lived near the gate, that one of
our gunners had not only plundered his potato-garden, but had also
otherwise ill-treated him. On my going to investigate the business on
the spot, it turned out that he had struck the gunner. Petit Jean,
who had accompanied me officially, on hearing this, turned suddenly
on the fellow, “You sacré cochon! frapper un militaire; sacré vilain
homme! Quoi!--un vil paysan frapper un militaire? Ah, que cela me
révolte!”--and seizing a stake from the hedge, foaming with unfeigned
anger, he fell on the poor devil, and fairly chased him out of sight,
belabouring him all the way. What English soldier would ever take up
the cudgels against his own countryman because the French soldier was
his brother-in-arms? Whenever his patrol duty did not call him out,
he was sure to be found in the guard-room, or somewhere amongst the
men. He might certainly have been a spy in the camp, for Buonaparte
had most accurate information respecting the state, positions, and
numbers of our army, part of which no doubt was communicated by these
_gardes-champêtres_, who, as before mentioned, were all old French
soldiers, and did not conceal their attachment to the Emperor. Spy
or no spy, Petit Jean was always extremely obliging, and frequently
of most essential service to us. Our equipment was in every way too
perfect to leave any care as to what might be reported of our state;
and as to future movements, we were as ignorant of them as Napoleon
himself. But to return to our story. The row was all over, our mess
party broken up, and I retired to my room; but, alas! on getting into
bed I found sleep impossible--the moat under my window was peopled
with millions of frogs, and such was the horrid croaking of these
little wretches, that sleep was out of the question, and the Van
Voldens were avenged.




CHAPTER VII.


The next morning a most superb breakfast was on my table when I
returned from a stroll in the woods--the finest milk, eggs, and
butter I ever saw in my life, and in profusion. My servant had
procured them at the adjoining farm, and so cheap, that he had
brought a large soup-plate full of eggs and an antique jug holding
more than two quarts of milk. During our whole stay at Strytem
there was never any difference in this respect--always abundance.
After breakfast, the usual watering order parade took place in the
grand avenue, under the shade of stately beeches. The contented
countenances of the men, the sleek coats and frolicksome spirit
of the horses, testified sufficiently that neither had fared
indifferently. I found, however, that the chateau farm was rather
crowded, and therefore detached the 1st division, officer and all,
to a small village, with a pretty chateau on the hill, about a mile
from us--Yseringen. This move made all hands completely comfortable,
and so we went on. Nothing could exceed the delicious tranquillity
I enjoyed in Strytem. For those who preferred more bustle and more
society Brussels was at hand, and thither they frequently repaired;
on the other side Ninove, the headquarters of Lord Uxbridge, who
commanded the cavalry, was only three or four miles distant, and all
the surrounding villages were full of cavalry or horse-artillery.
Every one breakfasted in his own apartment. At ten A.M. watering
order parade and inspection of horses, &c. Then, after visiting the
billets and getting through any casual business, I was at liberty,
and, mounting my horse, employed the remainder of the morning in
exploring the country. In the evening we all assembled to our social
meal. Those who had been to Brussels (or, as we used to say, “Up to
town”) usually brought some news, or at least some gossip, which
added zest to the excellent cheer almost always on our board. How
our table was furnished I do not exactly recollect, my notes on the
subject being silent,[6] but believe the meat was ration brought from
Ninove every day by our commissary (Mr Coates), so was the bread.
Poultry, vegetables, &c. &c., we procured in abundance amongst our
neighbours; our wine came from Brussels; candles, wood, &c., from
Ninove. After dinner some took a short ride previous to seeing their
horses done up for the night. For my part, I preferred enjoying the
calm beauties of evening with my cigar under the splendid avenue of
beech in rear of the chateau, and when night closed in, retired to
my antique saloon, which a blazing fire of fagots and a couple of
candles made tolerably comfortable. Here I busied myself in Madame de
Genlis’s ‘Life of Henri IV.,’ sometimes until midnight, tranquil and
happy. At times, as I occasionally looked up from my book and cast
my eyes round, no sound interrupting the solemn stillness save the
ticking of my watch as it lay on the table before me, the croaking
of the frogs, or the moaning of the wind as it eddied round the old
hall, I could almost fancy the deep-toned portraits of _ci-devant_
Van Voldens, in their sombre velvet suits and stiff ruffs, actually
embued with life, and frowning on my intrusion; or fixing them on
the door of the chapel, I would conjure up figures of warriors,
_bourgmestres_, or damsels clad all in white, raising the tapestry,
and----but then old Bal, getting up from his place before the fire
to scratch himself, or the voice of the sentry in the outer court
solemnly proclaiming “All’s well,” would suddenly recall me from my
reverie to a consciousness that it was bed-time; and so to bed I hied
me, to sleep as well as the eternal frog-concert would allow. Such
was the general tenor of our life at Strytem, varied a little at
times by circumstances to be related as they occurred, and sometimes
disturbed for a moment by reports of hostile movements, or the low
murmurs of a distant cannonade. This last, however, was heard so
frequently, without being followed by any consequences, that we got
accustomed to, and finally disregarded, it. Subsequently we found
that it proceeded from the practice and exercising of the Belgic
artillery at Mons, or somewhere in that direction. My rides, after a
time, brought me somewhat acquainted with the neighbouring country,
but only by slow degrees, for surely never was reconnaissance of any
country more difficult,--it was a perfect labyrinth.

In the immediate neighbourhood of Strytem the ground arose in a
succession of round-topped hills, of no very great height, and all
very much alike. Of these, the summits, and frequently the slopes,
were clothed with woods of oak, ash, beech, &c. &c., intermixed with
coppice of the finest hazel I ever saw, thus forming a number of
little valleys running into each other, but all, from the profusion
of wood and the overlapping (if I may use the term) of the flanks of
the hills, presenting an appearance of the most perfect seclusion.
Amongst these woods were scattered large tracts of cultivated ground,
laid out in fields of wheat, rye, barley, buckwheat, hops, clover,
&c. &c., frequently here enclosed by thick and lofty hedges; quite
in the bottoms, and lying along a small stream of water, which ran
through almost every one of these little valleys, were meadows of the
liveliest verdure, whilst rows of magnificent elms fringed the banks
and overshadowed the rippling waters of the rivulets. Villages and
detached farms were of constant recurrence, and in all directions
one saw the modest spires of the village churches rising above the
massed and verdant foliage. Although these woods were, generally
speaking, of no great extent--perhaps only a few acres--yet were
there some of such extent as to entitle this to the appellation
of a woody, or even forest, country. The Bois de Liederkerke, for
instance, commenced near the village of Paemêle, and extended no less
than four miles in the direction of Assche; everywhere two or three
miles wide, including a great variety of ground, and in different
directions were several others nearly of the same extent. At first,
one is surprised at finding such vast tracts of woodland in a country
so populous and so assiduously cultivated; but the thing is easily
explained. In addition to the ordinary demands for small wood in
husbandry, there are large and numerous hop-grounds requiring a
continual supply of poles; but, above all, the enormous quantity of
fuel required, not only by the peasantry, but also by the inhabitants
of the towns,--wood being almost exclusively used for that purpose.

The kind of country I have been describing extended northward from
us as far as Assche--perhaps much further, but of that I know
not--and eastward to Brussels. Towards the south the round hills
gradually gave place to longer slopes and plateaux, and the woods
became less frequent, but the villages were numerous, with the same
careful cultivation everywhere. Toward the west, and only a few
miles distant, we were bounded by the Dender, holding its course
through extensive flat meadows covered with luxuriant crops of
hay, or affording pasturage to herds of fine cattle. Beyond the
river-valley the country assumed a different aspect: long and less
abrupt slopes; woods fewer and thinner; a total absence of hedges;
altogether presenting an aspect in many places bare and cheerless,
strongly contrasting with the lovely scenery about Strytem--if I may
call scenery lovely where we find neither rock, nor mountain, nor
precipice, nor torrent; but it is home scenery, and its character
simplicity, luxuriance, abundance, tranquillity, and repose. There
one saw the rustic dwellings of the peasantry situated in secluded
nooks, and embosomed in orchards and hop-grounds; the rural village
with its modest church low down in the rich bottom, surrounded by
smiling fields of grain or clover; a gentle rivulet slowly winding
its devious way amidst the rank luxuriance of vegetation clothing its
overhanging banks; the whole encased, as it were, by wavy heights,
crowned with thick and verdant woods. One thing, however, was wanting
to complete this picture of rural wealth and happiness--it wanted the
animating presence of domestic animals, of herds and flocks dotting
the fair surface of its fields. The farms in this country are not
large as with us; the farmer does not live in a splendid mansion,
still more splendidly furnished, nor does he idle away his time in
shooting or fox-hunting. The Flemish farmer is a plain honest rustic,
clad in homespun grey, a cotton night-cap on his head, wooden shoes
on his feet, and the everlasting short pipe in his mouth; he himself
holds the plough, guides his team, or assists in thrashing out his
grain. Ignorance of their language prevented my acquiring more
information concerning them and their affairs than what could be done
by observation of outward appearance; therefore I could neither learn
the extent of their farms, their ideas on agriculture, the amount
of rents, length of leases, nor the value of land, &c. Coarsely fed
and coarsely clad, still they are an industrious, hard-working, and
contented race; not very intelligent, I allow, but perhaps they are
the happier for it;--they are kind to their inferiors, affable and
communicative with their equals, and respectful, almost to servility,
to their superiors, or those they fancy such.[7]

Although many of the farming establishments in our neighbourhood
resembled in plan and construction those already described about
Dendermonde, yet were they not universally of this description. That
adjoining the chateau was really a very fine one--substantial brick
house, barns, out-houses of every kind, all on a great scale, and, as
usual, surrounded by a spacious court. But others were very different
from this; many were very humble abodes, constructed of wood or clay,
with thatched roofs and small casement windows, standing along the
edges of the fields, with their barn adjoining but not united, nor
any courtyard for manure, &c., the outbuildings all on a small scale,
as also, I suppose, were their farms. Others, standing likewise open
in the fields, were again of a different character. These had high
thatched roofs injecting several feet beyond the walls, and supported
by rough posts, forming a sort of verandah; this is filled up to the
eaves with firewood--some in logs, some in fagots--which gives to
the exterior a very rude appearance, and must make the interior very
dark, from the great depth of embrasure thus formed both to door and
window; but to balance this, it keeps the house cool in summer and
warm in winter. Although the actual village of Strytem consisted of
no more than the chateau, the farm, and the few mean houses clustered
round the church, yet the commune was extensive, comprising not
only many fine farms, but also other and more important villages.
The real _maire_ was M. le Baron Von Volden, son of the proprietress
of our chateau. He, however, seldom came nearer the place than
Brussels, leaving to his worthy _adjoint_, Jan Evenpoel, the care of
administering the government, and at the time of our arrival either
was in Paris, or had but just returned from it. Where the _maire_ is
thus vested in the person of the _châtelain_, the post seems to be
one of much importance--not confined to the police of the village
alone, but extending to a general superintendence over the welfare
of the commune, the state of the roads, &c. &c. Whether owing to
the baron being so much an absentee I know not, but the roads all
about Strytem were hardly passable after heavy rain (of which we
had a pretty good share), not only from their badness, having no
foundations, and receiving little or no repair, but also from the
unctuous and slippery soil, which makes riding absolutely dangerous
immediately after rain. Some of the worst sloughs, which otherwise
would be quite impassable, are repaired, as in Russia, Poland,
and America, by laying logs transversely, and covering them with
brushwood, and then earth; but these, after a little weathering and
wear and tear, become absolutely dangerous from horses slipping in
between the logs, sometimes up to the shoulder.

This was one of the drawbacks upon our enjoyment in this otherwise
pleasant country; and, having confessed as much, I may as well
admit that there were a few others which prevented us from living
in a state of absolute and unalloyed happiness. One grievance was
the cheapness of gin--a villanous kind of spirit manufactured in
the country, and on which a man could get “royal” for twopence; for
though our men were really fine fellows and generally very steady
soldiers, yet, like other Englishmen, they could not resist a social
glass nor avoid its consequences; and, indeed, if excuse it be,
they were in a measure driven to the use of this pernicious spirit
by the execrable quality of all the beer in the country, which more
resembled a mixture of cow-dung and water than anything else. The
sale of this poison took place in a small cabaret near the church,
which was usually thronged with our people every evening after
stable-hour; and, strange to say, where they mixed most sociably with
the boors, to my no small astonishment. It is a curious fact, that
upon inquiry at the sergeant-major how they could understand each
other, he replied that the Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Lincolnshire
men, who spoke very broad, could make themselves understood pretty
well, and in like manner could comprehend the Flemish of their boon
companions. Quarrels would sometimes arise in this _tabagie_, which
occasioned a temporary derangement of our tranquil life. But that
was a trifle to another grievance which stuck to us incessantly, and
was the most serious drawback we endured during our sojourn in the
valley of Strytem. I allude to the infernal and eternal frog-concert
that nightly disturbed our rest more or less, and kept us in a
constant state of irritability. For a few days we bore this curse
very philosophically, then began to war against the wretches by
pelting them with stones, firing at them with small-shot, beating
the water with poles, &c. &c., but all to no purpose, for though we
killed them by scores, yet did their numbers never appear to thin
nor their detestable “quoah, quoah” to lessen in intensity. Then we
made the wheeler construct a raft, and with this some one was always
cruising and slaying, yet still no alleviation to the evil. A council
was held, and it was determined that nothing short of draining the
moat would avail, and therefore drained it should be. Curiosity had
some hand in this decision, for we had heard that the moat contained
the largest carp ever seen--a fish several feet in length, and
weighing I know not what. The old gardener, when acquainted with our
resolve and ordered to make the necessary preparations, was perfectly
astounded, and (as did Mademoiselle and the sons) used every sort
of argument to turn us from it; amongst others, he assured us that
_l’année passée_ the Prussians had attempted to drain the moat merely
to kill all the fish--“les sacré vilains hommes!” but the stench
arising from it when low, quickly obliged them to desist. It would
not do--we were peremptory; and at length the old man opened the
voider, closed the feeder, and to our delight the work of destruction
began. Day after day the water gradually receded from the foot of
the old walls and from the opposite bank--already in many places the
oozy slime of the bottom began to appear--already we rejoiced at the
innumerable corpses of our enemies lying on it everywhere; the upper
part of the moat was already, not dry, but waterless; and we were
on the point of seeing the giant leviathan, when lo! the weather,
hitherto cool and showery, became superb, and the heat almost
insufferable. Decomposition, animal and vegetable, commenced with
alarming rapidity, and the mephitic vapours thus produced pervading
every creek and corner of the chateau, obliged us, _bongré malgré_,
to reclose the voider and reopen the feeder,--and thus terminated
_la guerre aux grenouilles_. But, alas! our punishment for having
resisted the entreaties and warnings of the old gardener was not to
close with the sluices. The same hot sun had dried up nearly all the
sources whence the moat had been fed, and many a long day of disgust
and repentance had we to endure ere the waters again covered the
odious slime sufficiently to relieve us from its nauseous stink, and
to enable the frogs to renew their song, which, when they did, was
to us a song of joy; and we had the further mortification of finding
that, with a little patience, we might have saved ourselves all the
trouble and suffering, for we had become so accustomed to it that it
fell on our ear innocuous.

But the charms of a country life have so occupied my brain as to
chase from it all recollection of being a soldier. To be sure,
professional occupations did not consume a very great portion of
our time, yet still there remain a few little items worthy of being
recorded--_imprimis_, drills. So completely is the whole of this
country (not occupied by wood) under tillage, that it was long after
our arrival at Strytem ere we discovered a spot on which we could
even draw out the troop, much less exercise it. At length, and I
cannot recollect how, we found a piece of scrubby common of some
acres in extent near the village of Denderhout, some miles off on the
other side of the Dender, and not far from Alost. Thither, then, we
repaired occasionally to practise ourselves, and prevent our people
forgetting entirely their drills. Thither also came occasionally
His Highness of Berri with his newly-formed corps of cavalry to
learn theirs. We frequently met, and as the ground was too confined
to admit of both corps working at the same time, the last comers
were obliged to dismount and wait until the others had done, for we
continued our operations when first on the ground, regardless of
the impatience of the royal drill-master, who, though he never said
anything to us, did not fail to betray, by a thousand little pettish
actions, the annoyance he felt at our want of due respect. One day
that they had got in possession and we were obliged to wait, I had a
good opportunity of seeing this curious corps and its savage leader.
The former presented a most grotesque appearance--cuirassiers,
hussars, grenadiers à cheval, and chasseurs, dragoons and lancers,
officers and privates, with a few of the new garde de corps, were
indiscriminately mingled in the ranks. One file were colonels, the
next privates, and so on, and all wearing their proper uniforms and
mounted on their proper horses, so that these were of all sizes and
colours. There might have been about two hundred men, divided into
two or three squadrons, the commanders of which were generals. The
Prince, as I have said, was drill-master. A more intemperate, brutal,
and (in his situation) impolitic one, can scarcely be conceived.
The slightest fault (frequently occasioned by his own blunders) was
visited by showers of low-life abuse--using on all occasions the most
odious language. One unfortunate squadron officer (_a general!_)
offended him, and was immediately charged with such violence that
I expected a catastrophe. Reining up his horse, however, close to
the unhappy man, his vociferation and villanous abuse were those of
a perfect madman; shaking his sabre at him, and even at one time
thrusting the pommel of it into his face, and, as far as I could see,
pushing it against his nose! Such a scene! Yet all the others sat
mute as mice, and witnessed all this humiliation of their comrade,
and the degradation of him for whom they had forsaken Napoleon.
Just at this moment one of our troop-dogs ran barking at the heels
of the Prince’s horse. Boiling with rage before, he now boiled over
in earnest, and, stooping, made a furious cut at the dog, which,
eluding the weapon, continued his annoyance. The Duke, quitting the
unfortunate _chêf d’escadron_, now turned seriously at the dog, but
he, accustomed to horses, kept circling about, yapping and snapping,
and always out of reach; and it was not until he had tired himself
with the fruitless pursuit that, foaming with rage, he returned
to his doomed squadrons, who had sat quietly looking on at this
exhibition. While all this took place, I had made acquaintance with
another general officer who appeared to be there in the capacity
of aide-de-camp--a gentlemanly sort of man, who, having been many
years in England with Louis XVIII., spoke English fluently. This man
pleased me much at the time; he was then in adversity. I met him
afterwards in prosperity--_nous verrons!_

Now that I have got on military affairs, it may be as well to record
the manner in which this country was occupied--at least as far as
my knowledge on the subject goes. First, then, headquarters of the
cavalry and horse-artillery at Ninove, where was also the principal
depôt of forage and provisions. The reason for assembling the cavalry
thus at some distance from the expected scene of operations was
the great fertility of this part of Brabant, and the facility of
communication with Alost, to which place, the Dender being navigable,
advantage could be taken of the rich Pays de Waes. The villages,
farms, &c., all round Ninove were full of troops.

  Okegem.--Major M‘Donald’s troop horse-artillery.

  Paemêle.--Sir Robert Gardiner’s      do.

  Strytem and Yseringen.--Captain Mercer’s    do.

  Lombeke, Notre Dame.--Captain Sinclair’s brigade of 9-pounders.

  Lennik, St Martin.--Headquarters of Lieutenant-Colonel Hawker,
  Royal Artillery, commanding two batteries somewhere in his
  neighbourhood.

  Beyond Ninove, westward, were the troops, horse-artillery, of
  Majors Bull, Ramsay, and Webber Smyth--forget names of villages.

  Liederkerke, Denderlue, and vicinage.--Life Guards and Blues.

  Schendelbeke and Vicinage.--The three huzzar regiments, 10th,
  15th, 18th.

  Lebbeke, &c.--23d Light Dragoons.

  Castre, &c.--16th      do.

  Meerbeke.--Headquarters Sir O. Vandeleur with 12th and 13th Light
  Dragoons.

  Grammont.--Foot Guards.

  Enghien.--Foot Guards.

  Schaepdale, &c.--Brunswick Infantry; all boys.

  Brussels.--_The_ headquarters--92d Highlanders, Rifles,
  Hanoverian infantry, and some Belgian dragoons and huzzars; grand
  depôt of forage and provisions, and of artillery stores, &c. &c.

  Mons.--English artillery and Dutch troops of different arms.

  Assche.--Troop of Belgian horse-artillery.

  Courtray, Atto, Tournay.--Believe huzzars of the K.G. Legion.

Visitors from England were at this time flocking over in great
numbers, and travelling about amongst the cantonments; but ours
was so secluded, being distant from every great road, that none of
them found us out, until Sir G. A. Wood (our Colonel commanding),
coming over to review the horse-artillery, brought with him the
Knight of Kerry and another Irish gentleman (name forgotten), who
passed a day with us in the old chateau, and were mightily pleased
with our snuggery. The inspection took place on the little common
at Denderhout. Six troops[8] were drawn out, and made a splendid
show--for finer, as to equipment, men, horses, &c. &c., could not
possibly be seen. Mine was generally allowed to be the finest (old
G), though there was some hesitation in deciding between it and
Webber Smyth’s.

The line was scarcely formed when his Royal Highness of Berri
arrived, and as usual got into a pet at finding himself forestalled.
Sir Augustus Frazer, however, with his excellent manners and as
excellent French, soothed him by expressions of regret, &c. &c.,
and stating that some of our people had come a long distance, and
unless soon despatched, would hardly be able to get home before
night. Roads bad, &c., otherwise, &c. &c. &c. The Duke cooled down,
and condescended to accompany Sir G. Wood through the ranks. We then
marched past, and off home.[9]

The French officers were all admiration and astonishment: they had
never seen anything so complete, nor any troop so mounted.

At Waterloo, on the 18th June, there were present eight troops of
British and two of Hanoverian horse-artillery. The British, as
far as I can recollect, were:--1. Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Hew D.
Ross’s; 2. Major Bull’s; 3. Major M‘Donald’s; 4. Major Ramsay’s; 5.
Lieutenant-Colonel Webber Smyth’s; 6. Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Robert
Gardiner’s; 7. Major Beane’s; 8. Lieutenant-Colonel Sir A. Dickson,
_alias_ Captain Mercer’s; also Captain Whinyate’s rocket-troop.
These were armed as follows:--Major Bull’s, six heavy 5½-inch
howitzers; Lieutenant-Colonel Gardiner’s and W. Smith’s, five
light 6-pounders, and one light 5½-inch howitzer--these two being
attached to the hussar brigades; Captain Whinyate’s rockets and light
6-pounders; each of the others had five 9-pounders and one heavy
5½-inch howitzer; and these “heavy drags” (as we called them) were
destined, by Sir Augustus Frazer, who commanded the horse-artillery,
together with Bull’s howitzers, to form a grand battery in reserve,
to be applied as he might find occasion--a formidable reserve it
would have been. However, it never came into play in that manner;
for in the general orders of the army organising it, we were all
posted to different brigades of cavalry, consequently Frazer’s
_grande batterie_ vanished in smoke. In this allotment I fell to
the first division, Lord Edward Somerset, composed of the three
Household regiments--the Scots Greys, 1st Dragoon Guards, and 6th or
Inniskillings. We continued, however, at Strytem, neither reporting
to, nor receiving orders from, Lord Edward; nor did we ever join the
division until 21st June, near Mons, whence we marched with them to
Paris, and then again separated.

Of the field-artillery I know very little, but remember that, about
the beginning of June, Sir Augustus Frazer, who was Sir G. Wood’s
_right-hand man_, told me that, including the horse-artillery, there
were then twenty brigades of British artillery, or 120 pieces, ready
to take the field. More arrived, I believe, after this; I know
Beane’s troop of horse-artillery did. What number of Hanoverian,
Dutch, Belgic, &c., there might be, I never knew.

Whence it originated, I cannot conjecture, but, certes, much
indecision did exist about this time as to our armament. Shortly
after our arrival at Strytem, we were ordered to send our light
6-pounders to Ghent, there to be exchanged for _heavies_. These,
after a few days, were to be sent back and replaced by the
9-pounders, which eventually we kept.

These changes, whilst in progress, cost me considerable anxiety, from
the dread of a move taking place whilst my guns were absent--an
event the more to be dreaded, since the Duke never attended to any
justification if anything went wrong; nor would he have looked to my
superiors, but myself alone, and thus I should have borne the whole
weight of his anger.

At length, about the beginning of June we were complete, when my
troop establishment was as follows, viz.:--

  5 guns, 9-pounders, and 1 heavy 5½-inch howitzer--8
      horses each,                                             48
  9 ammunition-waggons--viz., 1 to each piece,
      and a spare one per division--6 horses each,             54
  1 spare-wheel carriage--6 horses,                             6
  1 forge, 1 curricle-cart, 1 baggage-waggon--4
      horses each,                                             12
                                                              ---
                     Total in draught,                        120

  6 mounted detachments--8 horses each,                        48
  2 staff-sergeants, 2 farriers, 1 collar-maker,                5
  6 officers’ horses, lent them by the Board of Ordnance,       6
  6 officers’ mules, for carrying their baggage,                6
                                                              ---
                     Total,                                   185
  Additional horses unaccounted for above, spare, &c.,         30
                                                              ---
                     General total of animals,                215

  Besides which, each officer had his own two
    horses, and the surgeon one, making 11 more--so
    that, including these, we had                             226
                                                              ===

The _personnel_ consisted of--Second Captain, Mercer, commanding;
Captain Pakenham (subsequently Newland) as Second Captain;
Lieutenants Bell, Hincks, Ingleby, and Leathes--the former acting
as adjutant to Sir A. Frazer, the latter as supernumerary; and
before we left Strytem, Ingleby exchanged with Lieutenant Breton,
and joined Sir Robert Gardiner’s troop; so that, finally, it stood:
Breton, Hincks, Leathes--surgeon, Hitchins; 2 staff-sergeants, 3
sergeants, 3 corporals, 6 bombardiers, 1 farrier, 3 shoeing smiths, 2
collar-makers, 1 wheeler, 1 trumpeter, and 1 acting do., 80 gunners,
84 drivers--the 1 acting trumpeter not included. The organisation was
in three divisions, of two subdivisions each--a subdivision being
one piece of ordnance, with its ammunition-waggon and detachment.
Each division had one spare ammunition-waggon and a proportion of
the other carriages, &c. The division was commanded by a lieutenant,
and the subdivisions, the right of the division by a sergeant, the
left by a corporal--a bombardier to each subdivision. On parade,
the 5½-inch howitzer was the right of the centre division. Perhaps
at this time a troop of horse-artillery was the completest thing in
the army; and whether broken up into half-brigades under the first
and second captains, or into divisions under their lieutenants, or
subdivisions under their sergeants and corporals, still each body was
a perfect whole.




CHAPTER VIII.


I have confessed a little farther back that the happiness of our
sojourn in this lovely country was not without some alloy; and having
done so, I may add one or two more items to this balance, _per
contra_.

Soon after our arrival at Strytem, an officer of the commissariat was
attached to the troop, for the purpose of feeding us and our animals.
His first care was to secure a sufficient number of country waggons,
with their drivers and horses, intending to keep them together ready
for a move. The farmers, finding this a grievance, besieged me,
personally and through Mynheer Evenpoel, to allow them to remain
at home until wanted. This Mr Coates (who, by the way, was an
experienced and excellent commissary) strongly opposed, foretelling
the consequences but too truly; however, I yielded, upon a solemn
promise of M. l’Adjoint that they should be held ready to move at
a moment’s notice. Having committed this folly, I was well punished
for it by the anxiety I experienced at every report of a move; and at
last when the hour did come, they were called and found wanting, and
poor Mr Coates had to mount and hunt them up, when they ought to have
been loaded and on the road. This was a lesson to me.

Another misery I endured was the constant apprehension of falling
under the Duke’s displeasure for systematic plundering of the
farmers by our people, which I could not well check without risk
of incurring the same on another score--_i.e._, for not doing it!
This is enigmatical; let me explain. Our allowance of forage, though
sufficient to keep our horses in pretty good condition when idle,
was not sufficient when they were hard worked; nor was it sufficient
at any time to put on them that load of flesh, and give them that
rotundity of form which Peninsular practice had established as the
_beau ideal_ of a horse entering on a campaign, the maxim being--“The
more flesh a horse carries, the more he has to lose, and the longer
he will be able to bear privation.” To keep up this, therefore,
it was necessary to borrow from the farmers; and at this time of
the year the superb crops of the _trèfle_ offered themselves most
opportunely. The practice was general amongst cavalry and artillery,
so that all the horses were equally in good case; and it would have
been a most dangerous proceeding, by abstaining from it, to let
your horses appear thinner than those of your neighbour. The quick
eye of the Duke would have seen the difference, asked no questions,
attended to no justification, but condemned the unfortunate victim
of samples as unworthy of the command he held, and perhaps sent him
from the army. We therefore, like others, plundered the farmers’
fields; with this difference, however, that we did it in a regular
manner, and without waste--whereas many of the cavalry regiments
destroyed nearly as much as they carried away, by trampling about the
fields. The dread of this being reported kept me continually in hot
water, for my farmers (who, under the reign of the Prussians, would
never have dared utter a complaint), hearing how strictly plundering
was forbidden by the Duke, soon became exceedingly troublesome with
their threats of reporting me.[10] How we escaped it is difficult to
say, but certainly we continued helping ourselves; and latterly St
Cyr, and some other farmers, getting more docile, would themselves
mark out where we were to cut. Our neighbour at the chateau farm
(Walsdragen) was the most troublesome. The Duke was not partial to
our corps, which made it still more fortunate for me that these
people never put their threats in execution. It is difficult to
say why, but his Grace certainly treated us harshly, and on many
occasions unjustly. Of his harshness _voici un exemple_. Captain
Whinyates having joined the army with the rocket-troop, the Duke,
who looked upon rockets as nonsense, ordered that they should be put
into store, and the troop supplied with guns instead. Colonel Sir G.
Wood, instigated by Whinyates, called on the Duke to ask permission
to leave him his rockets as well as guns. A refusal. Sir George,
however, seeing the Duke was in a particular good-humour, ventured to
say, “It will break poor Whinyate’s heart to lose his rockets.” “D--n
his heart, sir; let my order be obeyed,” was the answer thundered in
his ear by the Duke, as he turned on the worthy Sir George. Let me
return to the country and its charms.

With me one of the most delightful occupations is the exploring
a new country; so that, whilst others could not exist except in
Brussels, I found abundant occupation for my leisure riding about
the neighbourhood of Strytem. One of my first rides was, as in duty
bound, to Ninove. Instead of taking the main road from Brussels
thither, which runs through Meerbeke, I took a by one to Liederkerke,
and, turning to the left a short distance from this place, crossed
the gently-flowing Dender, opposite the little village of Okegem, by
a rustic bridge supported on posts, so narrow and fragile that it
was not without demur, and at last leading my horse, that I ventured
over. I found the officers of the troop here very humbly lodged--in
mere cottages, and that of a poor description. Nothing here
comparable to our lordly tapestried saloons at Strytem--to the which,
by the way, we were becoming attached, more particularly since the
fine weather had set in, and taught us to appreciate their coolness
and refreshing _demi-jour_.

The country, after passing the river, was not interesting, as I have
mentioned elsewhere, but the scenery improved somewhat on drawing
near Ninove, which place, with the immense monastery of white stone
built on the higher part of the ground, had a somewhat imposing
appearance: drawing still nearer, some fragments of old walls begin
to make their appearance amongst the trees, which now became more
numerous, and we enter the place under a dark-browed picturesque
arch, flanked by two circular towers, partly in ruins and overgrown
with ivy, the whole half concealed, until one turns short upon
it, by the clustering foliage of some handsome elms and the thick
shrubbery of bushes growing out of the old walls. As my horse’s feet
resounded under the archway, a flash of romance came across me, and
I thought of the counts of Burgundy and their romantic court, and
pictured in my mind’s eye some lordly pageant streaming from out the
archway in all its glittering array. Sober reality soon banished
romance. A short street brought me from the gate to the head of
the principal one--long, broad, clean; houses low, and of rather a
humble description; on the whole, looking more like the street of
an English country town than anything I had seen in the Pays Bas
here; and standing across it was the monastery which had formed
so conspicuous a feature in the aspect of the town from without.
This, instead of representing the sort of ecclesiastical building
one would expect a monastery to be, was a magnificent modern-built
house of three storeys, pierced with numerous large sashed windows,
looking airy and cheerful--anything rather than the house of sorrow,
repentance, and abstinence. It is, I suspect, a modern restoration
of the monastery of Premonstrantine monks mentioned by Blau, and
the only one he does mention. It was suppressed in 1792. Wandering
into the court, which was overrun with grass and weeds, I met the
only remaining brother of the order, the dress of which he wore. His
appearance was venerable, but whether it was that he was naturally
morose, or because I was a heretic, he would answer none of my
questions, only making a waive of the hand in answer to my inquiry
whether I might walk over the premises. That this reserve did not
arise from ignorance of French, his immediately turning and giving
directions to a labourer in that language testified. Lord Uxbridge
and his staff having taken up their abode here restricted my
observations to the exterior of the building. I saw enough, however,
to learn that the Premonstrantine monks had once been lodged like
princes, and so passed on to look at the town.

Ninove is prettily situated on the left bank of the Dender, from
which its spacious street ascends by a gentle acclivity; and at
this time it presented a very gay and bustling appearance, from
the presence of the cavalry staff and the active operations of the
commissariat. It may contain about 3000 inhabitants, and was once
surrounded by a wall, with flanking towers, of which some vestiges
still remain. I believe much weaving is done here, and I saw several
mills and tanneries. Blau says the ancient name was “Nienevem,
Ninoviam, Ninovam, _vulgus_ Kandrorum; _nunc_ Ninovam--Gallo belgæ
Ninof appellant; Belgia regalis,” &c. So much for Ninove. For that
time I bid it adieu, and passing the bridge at the bottom of the
street, took my road homewards through the pretty and interesting
country to the southward of it. Old Blau says there was some joke
against the people of Ninove connected with its ancient name Ninevem,
which he compares with the Nineveh of Assyria. In my way home,
passing through Meerbeke, I saw a handsome chateau, where Sir Ormsby
Vandeleur had his divisional headquarters. It was a picturesque
object, and truly Flemish in style, though in situation, &c., it
resembled an English country-house--two storeys, with numerous
large windows, and the usual double tier of dormitory windows in
the high roof. It was flanked at either end by a round tower, with
the characteristic conical roof. The grounds were quite English. A
level lawn of smooth and verdant turf extended from the front to the
road. Shrubberies of laburnums, &c., surrounded it on three sides,
concealing the offices, and these were backed by a thick wood of
lofty forest-trees. To judge from externals, an agreeable quarter.

The great Bois de Liederkerke afforded me a fine field for
exploration, and many a delightful ride I took amongst its grateful
shades. In one of these I discovered, in the very heart of it, a
cleared spot of a few acres, part of which was occupied by the
blackened ruins of some building, and part exhibited the very
melancholy appearance of a once handsome garden, run wild and gone
to decay--even the very ruins were nearly overrun by brushwood and
weeds. A peasant, whom I met with after leaving the wood, told me
that although he had never seen these ruins, he supposed they must
be the remains of a convent of nuns which once existed somewhere
in the wood, but had been burned many years ago. Ignorance of his
language prevented my understanding a long story he told me--partly
in Flemish, partly in French--but I picked out that the nuns of this
convent had all been ladies of considerable, some of very high, rank.

The main road to Alost, by Liederkerke and Denderlue, runs through
this wood, and, emerging from it on that side, one exchanges the
gloomy obscurity of the forest and confined view amongst the trees
for the broad light of day and a wide expanse of fine meadows,
covered with herds of cattle, through which the Dender runs brawling
and bubbling along over its pebbly bed, crossed at this point by
a long wooden bridge, immediately beyond which is the village of
Liederkerke, at the time of my visit full of our Household troops.

It was a curious sensation that of seeing Lifeguardsmen lounging
about the street and before the houses--these people are so
intimately associated in one’s mind with London, the Park, Horse
Guards, &c. Nor was the contrast between their tall full figures and
rosy complexions and the gaunt awkward figures and sallow complexions
of the Flemish peasantry--the smart tight-fitting scarlet or blue
jackets of the one, with the coarse homely garbs and dingy-coloured
smock-frocks of the other--less curious.

Both banks of the river, which here approach each other and are
rather steep, are well clothed with trees, and form a picturesque
scene. Immediately above and below the bridge, these banks, retiring
from each other, leave between their bases and the river a wide
level of meadow-land, which, being everywhere bounded by low
thickly-wooded hills, and, as before mentioned, thickly sprinkled
with herds of fine cattle or luxuriant crops of hay, now almost
ready for mowing, afford scenes of a different but not less pleasing
character. On the right the hills, projecting like a promontory,
and blending themselves with those on the left, enclose these fine
meadows in an amphitheatre of beautifully variegated and tufted
foliage, unbroken by buildings or any indication of the haunts
of man; whilst the left bank, less thickly wooded, presents here
and there intervening fields, the high thatched roofs of farms
and cottages, and, pre-eminent amongst the whole, the spire of
Denderlue peeping through the foliage. Amongst other excursions, one
was of a more than commonly interesting nature, since it brought
me acquainted, not only with a very lovely spot, but also with a
singularly eccentric character--one whose history is of so romantic
a nature, that I ever regret not having made myself master of it in
all its details; I mean Paul Visconti, Marquis d’Acornati and Lord
of Gaesbeke, the chateau of which he inhabits. The first notice we
had of this singular man was from some officers of the 23d Light
Dragoons, who had been cantoned in his village. On their first
arrival the old gentleman was quite furious at the insult offered
him in sending troops thither at all, but especially without his
having been consulted. The officers, having quartered their men,
proceeded to take up their own abode in the chateau, and the Marquis,
being aware of this, closed his gates, and made preparations to
resist. His garrison consisted of two or three ancient domestics
and six or eight young boys. On approaching the gates, the
officers were somewhat surprised at seeing guns pointed at them
from several embrasures, and at the same time a venerable turbaned
head, projecting from one of them, demanded, in good English, how
they dared trespass on the property of the Marquis d’Acornati,
peremptorily bidding them to depart, or take the consequences. The
captain, a true English gentleman, having heard something of the
Marquis’s peculiarities from the villagers, instead of resenting the
opposition, humoured the old man’s whim, and commenced a parley in
the true language and all the forms of chivalry. This was touching
the Marquis in a tender point. The gates were thrown open, as
were his arms, to these courteous strangers, whom he received and
entertained with the hospitality of the olden times during their
stay, mourned their departure, and never mentioned them afterwards
but in the highest terms of praise. Some of my officers had already
visited Gaesbeke, and their accounts excited my curiosity to see this
extraordinary man. Accordingly one day mounting Nelly I set out. The
road lay through the large village of Lennik St Martin, remarkable in
the distance for its handsome spire, towering above the more humble
ones of the surrounding villages. Here I found Lieutenant-Colonel
Hawker and his adjutant, Lieutenant Anderson. The colonel commanded a
division composed of two batteries, 9-pounders, which were cantoned
in his immediate neighbourhood, but not in Lennik. Hence the country
was exquisite--the scenery acquiring a greater degree of interest
from the increasing height of the hills, though in luxuriance and
verdure, both of arborific and cereal vegetation, it could not exceed
that which I had left behind me.

At length, after a pleasant ride of about twelve miles, on attaining
the summit of a hill, the noble Château de Gaesbeke appeared in
front, on the edge of a deep ravine, which separated me from it,
surrounded by thick woods, the sombre verdure of which harmonised
well with the mellowed tone of its antique brick walls and towers,
whilst their round tufted tops were finely contrasted with its sharp
angles and pointed conical roofs. Crossing the ravine, I arrived on
a plateau of rich velvety turf, ornamented by a few clamps of the
most superb beech-trees I ever saw in my life, some of their boles
rising almost straight forty or fifty feet, without a twig to break
the smooth rounded surface of their glossy grey bark. Fine as those
composing the great avenue at Strytem were, still they were far
exceeded in size, luxuriance, and beauty of form by these. Artificial
means are employed to produce these magnificent ornaments of the
park or pleasure-ground. Whilst the tree is young it is constantly
watched, and every bud carefully eradicated the moment it pierces the
bark, until, having attained a certain height, nature is permitted to
take her course and push out lateral branches, leaving between them
and the soil a stupendous column of timber. A broad carriage-road,
winding amongst these clumps, led to the great gate of the chateau,
now unsuspicious of another military invasion, standing wide open.
It was approached by a stone bridge thrown over a ditch, which,
running along the front of the chateau, imperceptibly lost itself in
the steep declivity to the right and left. The lofty arched portal
was flanked by round towers, having semicircular embrasures on the
first floor, and above them a row of arched windows with rusty iron
balconies, extending across the gateway also. Toward the right, the
two tiers of large French windows gave a more modern air to the
curtain (if I may so call it), which was terminated in that direction
by an immense elliptical tower, the steep roof of which finished in a
short ridge with ornamental iron-work, and a weather-cock at either
end. To the left, the blank wall ended in a round tower of smaller
dimensions, and without the usual conical roof, its picturesque
antique form only partially seen through the foliage of the trees,
which formed a screen before that front.

I entered the castle court without seeing a soul, or any indication
of the place being inhabited. True, there was little of ruin. The old
walls appeared generally in good repair; the glass in the windows was
sound, not a pane broken--yet a forlorn deserted aspect reigned over
all; and the bent iron ornaments of the roofs, the grass-grown court,
and the shattered remains of two or three low-wheeled carriages,
lying half buried in the rank vegetation of weeds which had sprung
up around them, added not a little to the cheerless desolate aspect
of the whole. To the right on entering was a long range of two
storeys (which, from the lofty windows, appeared to be the state
apartments), terminating at either end with a tower. From the gateway
into the angle on the same side similar features indicated other
suites of apartments. To the left of the gateway, extending to the
tower on that side, were stables and coach-houses. From this tower a
parapet-wall followed the outline of the ground along the edge of the
declivity, running out in semicircular bastions at intervals of about
fifty yards, until, joining the tower at the extremity of the right
wing, it completed the enclosure of the court, forming an area of an
irregular figure, the low parapet allowing to the windows of the main
building a most striking and extensive view over the rich country
to the westward. The defence of this front was further increased by
a range of casemated apartments, with narrow loop-holes, probably
intended for arrows; but whether they extended the whole length of
the front, or only under the bastions, I forget. They are entered by
a narrow staircase from the court above. In the centre of this court,
upon a rude pedestal, was the fragment of a man in a sitting posture,
of which the Marquis afterwards gave me a printed explanation, drawn
up by himself, tending to show that this must be a remnant of the
celebrated Torse de Belvedere, and that the whole constituted a
figure of Ulysses, seated, and in the act of discharging an arrow
from his bow. But to return. After taking a cursory glance at the
general arrangement of the buildings, and finding that the sound of
my horse’s feet had no effect in extracting their inhabitants, I
rode up to and thundered at a low-arched door which stood half-open
in the great tower. The appeal was answered by a sallow-faced dirty
boy of fifteen, with long uncombed flaxen locks hanging about his
ears, and giving him a peculiarly wild and savage appearance as he
stood staring at me with widely-distended eyes. To my inquiry if the
Marquis were at home, he only answered by a nod, and then disappeared
in the gloom of the dark vaulted passage whence he had emerged.
Returning almost immediately, he had found his tongue, and begged
me to go to the principal entrance to the right wing (what had once
been handsome panelled folding-doors), which he unbolted within,
and, taking my horse as I dismounted, ushered me into a large and
lofty vestibule of handsome proportions, but quite unfurnished, and
in a miserable state of decay. On the opposite side of this, at the
desire of my guide, I entered a fine lofty room, with a coved roof,
painted in blue and white stripes in imitation of the interior of a
Turkish tent, and at the corners, where the drapery was supposed
to be gathered up, ornamented with an imitation of golden cords and
tassels. Round the walls were suspended trophies formed of swords,
daggers, pistols, &c., all richly mounted, and almost all Oriental.
The furniture consisted of large ottomans, covered with a striped
stuff to match the pattern of the tent. These were ranged round the
walls, and there was neither chair nor table in the room, which was
lighted by an arched window opening upon a clumsy wooden balcony,
and commanding a beautiful view over the distant country and of the
deep wooded ravine below. After waiting here about ten minutes, the
object of my curiosity made his appearance, followed by a rather
vulgar-looking fattish man, with whom he had been engaged, and whom
I discovered to be a lawyer of Brussels, and his man of business.
This gentleman soon took his leave, and left me _tête-à-tête_ with
his client. Let me draw his portrait, while still fresh in my memory:
Below the middle size, and a little bent by age; thin, light, and
active; a countenance embrowned by southern suns, if not natural;
regular features, and a face that had evidently once been handsome;
quick, sparkling, intelligent eyes giving to his physiognomy a
vivacious expression, rather at variance with the wrinkled cheek
of the _octogènaire_. His costume was completely Turkish. A white
muslin turban, somewhat soiled, but plentifully beset with precious
stones, covered his head; an ample caftan of blue cloth, vest and
trousers of the same--the former tied across the chest with strings,
the latter large and full-gathered, and at bottom stuffed into a pair
of extremely short boots, strangers apparently to Day and Martin or
their kindred of the Pays Bas. A crimson silk sash girded his waist,
in which was stuck an Oriental poignard, having its handle entirely
covered with precious stones, and scabbard tastefully enchased in
silver filigree. In his right hand he carried a short hunting-spear,
and in his left a small _cor de chasse_. His address, easy and
affable, was evidently that of one accustomed to the best society.
The reception he gave me was most flattering, and even affectionate;
and he incessantly repeated his admiration of England and her sons.
For my part, I told only half the truth in stating that the celebrity
of his chateau and gardens had procured him the honour of this
visit, never hinting how great a lion he was himself. After a short
conversation, he proposed showing me his chateau, &c., and conducting
me through several apartments on the ground-floor, we arrived at
his own bed-room in the extremity of the building. Nothing can be
conceived more desolate and cheerless. Superb as to dimensions and
form, these apartments were completely unfurnished, and in a most
melancholy state of dilapidation. The painting soiled and faded, the
elaborately-moulded ceilings and cornices coming down piecemeal and
covering the floors with their fragments; these floors themselves
rotten, and sinking in many places into holes. The shutters of the
high and numerous windows, some closed entirely, others only half;
others, again, with one leaf, perhaps, on the floor, and one hanging
by a single hinge. Such was the appearance of these once lordly
rooms. I shuddered as I traversed this scene of former splendour--of
present degradation. The mind, always busy on these occasions, called
up the beruffed slashed-sleeve cavalier of other days; the courtly
dame, the stomacher resplendent with costly jewels, ebon locks
falling in ringlets over her bare, well-turned shoulders and swelling
bosom. How changed the scene! The lordly _châtelain_ has given
place to the little curved Turkish figure before me; the brilliant
assemblage of knights and dames to desolation and solitude.

The dormitory of mine host, where at least some comfort might have
been expected, was only of a piece with the rest. Coarse, scanty, and
not very clean-looking bedding, lying in a confused heap upon a low
bedstead of common deal, without curtains--in short, such a bed as
one sometimes sees in an ostler’s room over the stables--a rickety
deal table, and a couple of old chairs. None of the appurtenances
of the toilet, nor any apparent means of stowing his wardrobe; bare
walls, and nought else. One might have imagined it the abode of
some poor devil whom charity had admitted to occupy a nook in the
deserted mansion. The Marquis showed all with perfect _sang-froid_,
unconscious that there was anything strange in a man of his princely
fortune living like a pauper, and continued leading me from room to
room, until we arrived at one smaller than the rest, and a little
less dilapidated, which he announced as his study--a title to which
a huge table, occupying the greater part of it, and covered with a
heap of papers, pictures, and writing material, all intermingled in
most glorious confusion, seemed to give some colour; and here were
also two or three common chairs. From amongst the litter on the
table, after a little hunting, he rummaged out a small miniature of
a female, which he thrust into my hand with an air of exultation,
as much as to say, “There!--what think you of that?” and evidently
supposing me as intimate with its features as himself, and as
evidently mortified at my asking who the original might be, whilst,
with rather a haughty air, he informed me that it was the portrait
of his dear mistress (kissing it respectfully), the Empress Maria
Theresa, whom he had had the honour to serve as an officer of
Hungarian hussars many years. Whilst laying the miniature again on
the table, he hurried out of the room, motioning me to follow him.
The old man was quite chivalric when speaking on this subject, and
apparently quite in earnest.

Our next visit was to the kitchen, whither he took me to see the
thickness of the walls, which were no less than 10 feet. Such a
den as this never before sullied the respected name of kitchen.
From the smallness of the windows, or port-holes, and the enormous
thickness of the walls, it was, even at this time of day, almost
dark enough to require candles; spacious and vaulted, with a floor
all decayed--and no wonder, for it was in great part covered by
an immense heap of potatoes, and quite devoid of furniture. Its
occupants were a second Dame Leonarda, and three or four dirty boys,
lounging indolently about. A wood-fire blazed on the ash-encumbered
hearth, over which was suspended an iron pot filled with potatoes.
He then led me through the casemates or subterraneous defences on
the western side, before mentioned; and having thus completed our
survey of the castle, we sallied from the portal to visit the gardens
and _pleasaunce_, the Marquis stepping out with all the briskness
of youth. We had got about half-way over the lawn, under one of the
magnificent clumps of beeches, when suddenly my conductor, stopping,
put his horn to his mouth and blew such a peal as made the woods ring
again. No result followed, and as he had not explained himself, I
was at a loss to conjecture the meaning of this, unless it were to
let me hear the echo. After waiting impatiently a few minutes, the
sound was repeated, and an instant afterwards out came all the boys
scampering through the portal and over the turf towards us, with an
activity strongly contrasted with their former listlessness. This,
however, did not satisfy their master, who, rating them soundly for
their inattention to his first summons, ordered them to bring out
the _carriole_. In a few minutes one of the old carriages I had
seen in the court was drawn out by a miserable half-starved-looking
beast, hardly deserving the name of a horse, and with harness to
match--that is, old, rusty, broken, and mended with bits of cord, &c.
Into the suspicious-looking vehicle we both got, and having exchanged
his hunting-spear for a shabby whip, the Marquis proceeded to do
coachman, and conducted me through his lovely domain; for lovely it
really was, in spite of the neglect evident in all directions--a
circumstance, however, that one scarcely regretted, since it threw
such an air of wildness over the scenery as to make it most charming.

The ground on which the castle stood ran out in knolls, with very
abrupt slopes, forming deep ravines, at the bottom of which streams
of limpid water ran bubbling along, until finding their way to the
main trunk, or great ravine, under the western front, they there
united their waters and formed a small lake, whose placid surface
was animated by swans and whole flocks of wildfowl, which here found
an undisturbed retreat. The whole of the ground above described,
excepting the level lawn in front of the great gate, was thickly
covered with wood--in some parts impervious from the thick shrubbery
of undergrowth, in others clear from this encumbrance--affording
splendid forest vistas between the boles of the magnificent
trees--the ground beneath carpeted with the most beautiful variety
imaginable of mosses and wild-flowers--innumerable creepers hanging
in festoons from the branches, with here and there a venerable ruin,
fallen against and only supported by its neighbours, increasing
the wildness and charm of this enchanting scenery. At times,
after following a path winding through the thick shrubberies, and
overshadowed by the luxuriant branches of the forest trees, so as to
be in perfect twilight, we suddenly came upon a small cleared space,
carpeted with turf, in the centre of which, perhaps, was a rustic
altar, or the fragment of a column, the marble of which, stained by
damps or the encroachments of variously-coloured lichens, harmonised
well with the tints of the sylvan scene around it. Some of these were
simple cylinders; others were angular, with projecting cornices.
Offerings of flowers there were on many of them--evidence of the
feelings and peculiar sentiments of the noble proprietor, and that,
although neglectful as far as repairs went, he still had eyes to see
and a heart to feel the beauties of his lovely domain. Again emerging
from the _demi-jour_ of the cool _berceau_, the road wound round the
face of a knoll, affording a charming view of the distant country,
with the lordly chateau towering in the foreground; then replunging
into obscurity, it opened again on a scene as extensive but of a
totally different character--the country towards Hal, with its long
and more thinly-wooded slopes and summits. In one place, a clearing
of three or four acres, bearing a crop of potatoes, presented
precisely such a scene as one meets with in America--the ground still
encumbered with roots and branches, the lofty surrounding wall of
grey stems, here and there a tree fallen against its neighbours, or
hanging forward as if ready to come to the ground at a touch; in
short, a scene of such savage wildness as one would hardly expect to
meet in this land of culture and improvement.

After a delightful drive, we returned to the chateau, passing under
the ramparts of the garden, which, lying on the slope of the hill,
are banked up in such a manner as to form a succession of nearly
level terraces. These are laid out in parterres, ornamented with
statues and fragments, &c. In the centre of these, a circular wooden
tower rises to a great height, forming a conspicuous object from
all the neighbouring country, over which the gallery on its summit
commands a most extensive view. The walls of this tower are of open
work, and, as well as the winding staircase within, are said to be a
_chêf d’œuvre_ of carpentry.

As it was growing late, I was obliged to decline my host’s invitation
to visit his farm in the valley below; and having, with the
assistance of one of his young pages, saddled my horse, I took leave,
and returned to Strytem highly pleased with my excursion.

A few days afterwards the Marquis sent me a bundle of papers
containing the history of Gaesbeke and its counts; but being unable
from want of leisure to copy any of it, I can only remember that
the chateau was built about the middle of the thirteenth century by
one of the Counts of Brabant, of whom it long continued to be the
principal residence. Of the present proprietor I could learn little
except what was imparted by himself during our ride, in substance
as follows:--Paul Acornati Visconti, an Italian by birth, inherits
Gaesbeke in right of his mother, and by the father’s side is of the
celebrated family of Visconti of Milan. Early in life he entered the
Austrian army, and served as lieutenant and captain of Hungarian
hussars during the Seven Years’ War. At the peace of 1763, finding
himself free, and in possession of a princely fortune, he gave
himself up to his vagabond propensities, and passed his time in
wandering over Europe, &c. &c. In this way he ran over all Germany,
France, and much of Russia and Poland; traversed Denmark, Sweden, and
Lapland as far as the North Cape. Either Dr Clarke or Acerbi mentions
meeting him at Tornea, or having heard of him there. He then visited
the British Islands, where he remained some time (I think he told
me he had been twelve times to England), extending his wanderings
to the remotest corners of Ireland, the Highlands of Scotland, and
the Western Isles. Here (in England) he became acquainted with many
of our celebrated characters--civil, military, and literary--of
whose intimacy he was not a little proud. He was delighted with
England and its inhabitants, but his fondness for both yielded to
the unaccountable mania with which he was subsequently seized for
Turkey, the Turks, their manners, their institutions, and everything
belonging to them; and after a prolonged residence amongst them, only
returned to his own country when the management of his extensive
estates in Italy and the Pays Bas imperatively required his presence.
What his religious sentiments might have been I know not, but in
every other respect he had become a complete Turk, and so determined
to remain; thus he has always dressed in the Oriental costume, as
I found him, and in every other way conforms to their customs. I
have already described the person of this curious character. His
health and activity are remarkable; and although a little curved,
there is nothing of the old man in his step, which is firm, light,
and active; his usual pace is a little trot. His manner of living is
extremely simple; his diet, I believe, principally vegetable, and his
beverage water. He seldom goes to bed before midnight, rising again
at three o’clock in the morning; and to this habit of early rising he
assured me he was indebted for his good health. Whether he had ever
been married I know not, but that he had a daughter I know, since
in the note of invitation to a fête he intended giving at Brussels,
he particularly mentioned his wish to introduce me to her. Amongst
the people of the neighbourhood I found he bore various characters,
some ascribing his eccentricities to a deranged intellect, others
to philosophy. Others believed him to be a magician, wherefore
the peasantry in general stand in great awe of him. All, however,
allow that he is a most charitable, good man. It is said that his
liberality towards even his most distant relations is so great, that
they amongst them enjoy more of his wealth than he does himself.
That he is wealthy is out of the question; his property is immense.
Besides the Gaesbeke estate, he possesses others both in the Pays Bas
and in Italy. Most of the best houses in Brussels are his, and the
Gaesbeke property alone comprises seventeen villages and parishes.
His own house in Brussels is said to be a magnificent one; in it
he gave the fête to which I was invited, which I afterwards heard
was very splendid, the first people of the country and many of our
most distinguished officers having been present. He seldom resides
in Brussels for any length of time, nor are his visits to that city
frequent, as he prefers retirement and the country.

The establishment at Gaesbeke consisted only of a gardener, an
old woman as cook, &c., and some five or six boys, from twelve to
sixteen years of age, whom he sometimes dressed in the Hungarian
hussar uniform, at others as Orientals--so said the people. Be that
as it may, they all wore the usual dress of the country when I saw
them. After this first visit the lovely domain of Gaesbeke became a
favourite lounge, and I passed many a delicious morning wandering
about its cool shady walks. Sometimes the Marquis was at home,
sometimes not, but it made little difference--he always received
me with the same kindness, and seemed not a little flattered at
the pleasure I took in his favourite woods; but we neither of us
interrupted the pursuits of the other, for if he were employed he
continued his employment, otherwise he would sometimes accompany me
himself, or send one of his young pages, if there were anything to be
done or seen that required assistance or a guide. It was not without
regret that, eventually, I was obliged to leave his neighbourhood
without having had an opportunity of taking leave of him.

There was another extraordinary character--a man of great wealth,
too--residing within a few miles of us, at Ternath, or St Ulris
Capelle; but him I only heard of from Leathes, who had visited
him, which I never had an opportunity of doing. This man differed
from Acornati in having his chateau splendidly furnished and his
pleasure-grounds, described as vieing in beauty with those of
Gaesbeke, kept in most excellent order. He had, moreover, a choice
collection of paintings.




CHAPTER IX.


Whilst our army thus revelled in luxury in this fine country, that
of the enemy, we understood, was concentrating on our frontier,
preparatory to the grand blow which was to drive us into the sea. To
meet the threatened invasion, it was generally understood in the army
that the Duke had made choice of two positions in the neighbourhood
of Brussels--the one a little beyond the village of Waterloo, the
other at Hal, the point where the roads from Ath and Mons unite. In
one or the other of these, it was said, he intended to await the
attack, according as the enemy might advance. Frequently, attended
only by an orderly dragoon, he would visit these positions, studying
them deeply, and most probably forming plans for their occupation
and defence. In confirmation, too, of the reports that the French
army would shortly advance, we about this time received an order
to divest ourselves of all superfluous baggage, and were given to
understand that, in case of passing the frontier, the army must be
prepared to forego all shelter but what would be carried with it,
since the operations were to be of the most active nature. Curious
to see these positions, I one day rode over to Hal, which was the
nearest to us. The country through which I passed for a long way was
like that about Strytem; but on approaching Hal it became more open,
free from wood, and without any kind of enclosures. This little town
is situated on the Senne, here a good deal interrupted in its course
by mill-dams, &c., so that it forms numerous ponds in and about the
place, only to be crossed by the stone bridge over which the road
from Braine le Leud and Braine le Château, &c., passes, and in the
town unites with the two great roads from Ath and Mons, which have
previously crossed a small rivulet descending from the north-west,
and thus ascends the steep street in the direction of Brussels. On
this side the ground rises to a considerable height, giving a great
command over the valley and roads winding through it, which may be
seen at a considerable distance descending from the opposite hills,
which recede so much to the southward as to be of no avail against
the positions, although considerably higher.

The town, as already stated, lies on a steep slope; the houses are of
stone, many of them large and of most respectable appearance; street
wide and airy; many mills, &c., in the lower part, and tan-yards.

I was obliged to content myself with a very superficial view of
Hal; for, having miscalculated the distance from Strytem, I had
no time for more than to ride through it and back again. The only
thing I saw on the road worth notice was a very pretty villa,
small, but exceedingly neat, standing in the midst of well-kept
pleasure-grounds, quite unlike anything else in the country that I
had hitherto seen.

I have as yet been so wrapped up in the country that I have passed
over Brussels, to which, however, I had already made several
visits, and to which I must now devote a page. So--to begin at the
beginning--my first visit was about four or five days after our
arrival at Strytem. The weather was particularly favourable. It was
one of those lovely days of spring, succeeding rain, when all nature
seems bursting into new life--when we are ourselves sensible of the
renovating effects of the season, and the elasticity of our spirits
is such, that everything appears beautiful to our sight--when all is
exhilaration and delight, and we are disposed to be in good-humour
with everything around us. The country through which my route lay,
rich in the bounties of nature, and exhibiting a pleasing variety of
feature, made this ride peculiarly agreeable. About half-way, at the
villages of Itterbeke and Dilbeke, the appearance of several riflemen
in grey or black uniforms, round hats having the brim looped up on
one side, and decorated with pendant green plumes, scattered about
the fields, the roads, and posted behind trees, somewhat surprised
me. Near the roadside, too, on the point of a green knoll, stood
one of those rude Rembrandt-like mills, so common in this country;
and on the wooden stairs leading up to the door sat several men,
with their rifles in hand or lying across their knees, whilst their
attention seemed steadily fixed on the surrounding country, as if
something interesting was transacting there. A dropping shot now and
then re-echoing amongst the woods, seemed to confirm the truth of
my apprehensions that the French army had advanced, and that I had
no time to lose in regaining Strytem. The sergeant of the party on
the mill-steps, however, dissipated my apprehensions. These people
belonged to the Duke of Brunswick, and, being all young soldiers, he
obliged them to live in their cantonments, as if in face of an enemy,
with all their videttes and advanced-posts out. The firing, I found,
proceeded from a party practising with their rifles at targets cut
in the shape of, and painted to resemble, French soldiers. This was
my first interview with men (_mere boys!_) with whom subsequently
I had to stand shoulder to shoulder in the great struggle. My
approach to the city was announced by the occurrence of several
pretty country-houses or villas, much in the same style as that I
had seen on the road to Hal, but no indication in the distance--no
towers, spires, or lofty building towering over the trees--until,
passing the summit of a hill, Brussels suddenly burst on my sight,
covering the slope of the hills on the opposite side of the valley--a
glorious picture, and one not readily to be erased from my memory.
From this point, and under such a sky, she showed herself to the
utmost advantage, and the atmosphere was so pure that even from
this distance every detail was distinctly visible. The cathedral
of St Gudule, standing upon a terrace, formed a striking feature.
The tufted verdure of the trees on the ramparts enclosing the city
enabled one easily to follow their outline along the summit of the
heights, whilst on the face of the slope the ramparts themselves,
with their venerable grey towers, gave additional interest to the
scene; the houses, rising in terraces, as it were, tier above tier,
and everywhere intermingled with foliage; innumerable churches and
chapels; palaces, too, amongst which, most conspicuous, was that of
Prince d’Aremberg and the Cour de Flandres, and in the lower town the
beautiful Stadthuys;--all united to form the glorious picture.

In the vale below, the river Senne wound its way slowly along amidst
green meadows, the surface of which was broken by long stripes of
white linen, spread there to bleach. In the west and south it was
closed by a belt of black forest--the ever-memorable Forest of
Soigney. The Senne was ravishing--it seemed as if one could never
tire of looking on it; and as I lingered to do so, the more prominent
features in the history of that fair city came crowding on my mind,
and, now that the scene of action lay before me, embodied themselves
to my mind’s eye. At first the city seems to have been confined to
the borders of the marsh, and thence gradually to have crept up the
hillside, until at last it was circumscribed by a rampart--the lower
part of the town being evidently the older, and of a different style
entirely from the upper.

Descending the hill, I entered this lower town by the Barrière de
Gand and a long winding narrow street, bordered on either side by
houses of black stone, three storeys (generally) high, but of a
mean appearance, without _trottoirs_ for the foot-passengers, and
the mud above my horse’s fetlocks; a little farther on I passed the
fish-market, and a fearful penance it was--for the strongest stomach,
I should think, could hardly resist its noisome smell, arising from a
fearful accumulation of garbage flung beneath the tables.

Passing along, I found the streets in this part of the town crowded
with commissariat waggons, coming for or taking supplies to the
neighbouring cantonments, so that between these and the multitude of
Hanoverian soldiers it was not without difficulty that I made my way
along and reached an expansion of the street where the Marché aux
Herbes is held, much as it used to be in the fore street at Exeter
ere the present market-place was built. The bustle, gaiety, groups of
females, the colour and smell of flowers and herbs, &c., always make
a vegetable-market an agreeable scene. This one was enhanced by the
various uniforms of the British, Belgic, and Hanoverian soldiery, and
the handsome shops surrounding it. These exhibited in their windows
every variety of the choicest productions of India and Europe; and
pre-eminent amongst them all were the jewellers and pipe-sellers, or
tobacconists, with their splendid displays of meerschaums, Turkish
pipes with amber mouth-pieces, rich tobacco-pouches, &c. &c. The
Montagne de la Cour, though restricted after passing the market,
still a broad street, ascended right in front; and at the foot of
this a large hotel (d’Angleterre) occurred so opportunely that I rode
into its court, and, leaving my orderly in charge of my horse, set
off at once, eager to explore this new and interesting ground.

My first impulse was to seek the park, of which I had so often heard,
and instinctively I ascended la Montagne de la Cour, which proved
the direct road to it. At the top of the ascent I found myself in a
pretty little square (Place Royale) surrounded by handsome houses,
but having very much the appearance of pasteboard. Turning thence
into a broad street, I found myself in a most magnificent square, far
exceeding in beauty, if not in size, any of ours in London--pretty
lawns and thick shrubberies, with fine trees, &c., enclosed by a
handsome iron railing, and surrounded by fine houses, the façades
ornamented by Ionic pilasters, and painted in delicate tints
of buff, green, &c., or white, and the whole forming a splendid
spectacle and delicious spot. The park is laid out in walks winding
through shrubberies and dingles, affording varied and pleasing
scenery, some part of the ground being broken and uneven. In the
centre is a sort of pavilion where refreshments are sold, and near
it is a sheet of water, &c. _Park_ is a misnomer; consider it a
_square_, in our acceptation of the term, and it is one of the most
beautiful in Europe. Its beauty is considerably increased by the old
ramparts with their fine umbrageous trees overtopping by far those
of the park, and completing one side instead of a row of houses.
The glimpse I here got of those ramparts naturally attracted me
thither, and I was delighted with the lovely, airy, and commanding
promenade they afforded. This promenade round the ramparts is the
most delightful imaginable, elevated as they are so much above the
highest houses of the city (on the east and north-east sides), and
overshadowed by stately elms, affording beautiful views over the
city and neighbouring country, always having in the foreground some
imposing and picturesque mass of ancient masonry, overrun with a
rank vegetation of large-leaved weeds, &c.; some grey and venerable
tower--a remnant of antiquity. Descending the hill on either hand,
the height of these ramparts decreases to that of the ordinary
fortifications of the middle ages; but here, in the lower part, the
walls and towers in themselves are far more picturesque, and exhibit
much greater antiquity. They are here, I suspect, the same that
were built when the city was first fortified in 1044, whilst those
above are the more modern fortifications of 1379. Above, as I have
before mentioned, the ramparts present a stupendous mound, with large
square towers, this elevation being there necessary to protect the
city--lying as it does on a declivity--from the higher ground beyond;
whilst here below they are only of moderate elevation and breadth,
with round or octagonal towers, the masonry time-worn and sombre,
almost to blackness, and eminently picturesque.

But this, my first visit, was too short, and there was too much to
see to admit of lingering long on any one spot; so, reluctantly
quitting the ramparts, I hurried with eager curiosity from street to
street and square to square, catching a slight, and but a slight,
glimpse of anything, yet delighted, and devouring all. There is a
charm which I cannot describe in the contemplation of these heavy
and old-fashioned yet picturesque structures, with their sculptures,
pointed gables, and eccentric variety of windows, such as most of
those (either Gothic, Flemish, or Spanish) with which La Grande
Place is surrounded. Here, too, is that most beautiful building,
the Hôtel de Ville, flanked by hexagonal towers, and surmounted by
its celebrated belfry, rising to a height, it is said, of more than
360 feet; its construction is of open work, and it is impossible to
imagine anything combining at once such majesty, grace, elegance,
and lightness. One would scarcely imagine that a work so delicate
could be enduring; and yet this lovely tower, even now in appearance
fresh and perfect, has already stood more than three, nay, nearly
four, centuries--having been built in 1445. The statue of St Michael
which surmounts it would, in my opinion, be better away; yet this is
a feature more vaunted than the elegant form of the building or its
admirable workmanship. The saint stands upon one foot, and pirouettes
with every breeze. The Hôtel de Ville was commenced in 1380. After
a lapse of four centuries, and notwithstanding the boasted “march
of intellect,” where is the man who could now sit down and conceive
such a structure? Many there are, perhaps, who by help of books and
existing examples, might compile something of the sort, but I doubt
whether any modern architect be capable of the _original conception_;
and I am sure that, spite of the ‘Mechanic’s Magazine’ and the
present philosophical studies of our masons, none of them could
produce more perfect or better work. Like painting, architecture
has had its day. Sir Christopher Wren himself acknowledged his
astonishment at the boldness of the arches of King’s College Chapel,
Cambridge, and confessed his ignorance as to their construction and
mode of placing the key-stones.

After all, the Hôtel de Ville is irregular in its construction, and
the placing the tower at one extremity of the façade instead of the
centre I have heard censured as a grievous fault;--I like it--there
is originality even in that. The general effect is most imposing.

Nor is the varied throng frequenting this fine place on market-days
unworthy of it,--their quaint and original costume harmonising well
with the character of the architectural setting around. Many were my
visits to Brussels, and always was I delighted. If I did not see all
that I now speak of at that first one, _n’importe_. The effect of St
Gudule’s (the cathedral) is in this respect very good, situated upon
a terrace to which one ascends by a broad flight of stairs to the
fine Gothic portal, flanked by two handsome towers, and looking out
over the city on the country beyond. Up this flight of steps I did
ascend with solemn pace and slow, and into its beautiful nave: but
the celebrated sculptured pulpit obtained from me no more observation
or admiration than those of Ghent and Bruges. The emotion I feel on
entering a Gothic cathedral is of a nature too solemn to admit of
dwelling upon, or even noticing, such things.

How strikingly Spanish are the charming Bruxellaises in their
mantillas, gracefully crossed on the bosom! I have often heard and
read that they are so, but had no recollection of the circumstance at
the moment the fact struck me. The mantilla itself, so Spanish, has
its testimony of their ancestry confirmed by the brilliant black eyes
sparkling beneath it; and the prevalence of black dresses amongst
the groups frequenting the park, or _allée-verte_, complete the
illusion, and for a second we forget that these are not Andalusians.
Never having been in company with any of the fair dames of Brussels,
it would be presumption to say more than what I saw of them in
public; my say, therefore, amounts to the having seen many lovely
faces and graceful figures, though I had once foolishly fancied
that all Flemish women must be of the same breed as Anne of Cleves,
or the strapping wenches with whom Rubens and others have made us
familiar--forgetting that, as the offspring of some of the finest
men and handsomest women in Europe, the Austrians, Spaniards, and
French, they ought to show well. From outward appearance it would
be, perhaps, difficult to decide the origin; but in the ladies the
Spanish blood generally seems to predominate.

In wandering about Brussels one is struck with the frequent
occurrence of ecclesiastical ruins--these are generally the remains
of monasteries suppressed at the Revolution in 1793. The extensive,
and apparently once handsome, house of the Capucines exhibits now
only a heap of rubbish, with about five or six feet of the massive
walls here and there; another, of which the chapel remained pretty
entire, was used by our commissariat as a magazine for hay, straw,
&c. &c.

A more striking scene, perhaps, cannot be imagined than the
_allée-verte_, with its long vista overarched by thickly-clothed
branches of the stately elms lining it in double rows on either
hand, the broad expanse of calm water covered by crowded and
gaily-painted barges, ornamented with flags and streamers, and
enlivened with music and singing. The spacious roads on each bank
gay with carriages, equestrians, and numerous pedestrians--all
apparently happy, consequently smiling and merry. I took this route
one Sunday with the intention of visiting the Palace of Lavickens,
but, alas! the luxury of lounging amidst the merry crowd under the
shade of the elms, and amongst these joyous groups, detained one in
such wise that, on arriving at the first lock, time no longer served,
and my project was necessarily abandoned. As I turned homeward,
the well-known overture to Lodoiska resounding from a neighbouring
cabaret attracted me thither, and what was my surprise at finding the
orchestra by which it was performed to consist of two pretty girls,
each with a violin, whilst the old mother accompanied them on the
violoncello. I afterwards heard these girls at a café near the Park,
where, the audience being more refined, their performance was more
careful. I thought their music exquisite, as well as their singing,
which they sometimes mingled with it. Had their expressive black eyes
and coquettish _cornettes_ of red-striped cotton anything to do
with it? In my subsequent visits to Brussels, instead of continuing
to frequent the Hôtel d’Angleterre, I found a brother officer whose
horses were billeted on the Hôtel d’Aremberg, and who offered me
stalls whenever I came to town--an arrangement so convenient that his
Highness was patronised by me during the remainder of my sojourn at
Strytem. I am not sure that I ever saw my princely host, but believe
that a tall, thin, elderly man, with a powdered head, a most amiable
countenance, and most gentlemanly bearing, who one day crossed the
stable-yard whilst I was there, must have been the Prince. We looked
at, but did not condescend to bow to, each other. His being on the
wrong side of politics was the cause of his domain being thus invaded
by strangers, and the billetmaster was careful to keep him full.

One of our lounges at Brussels now was the exhibition of paintings
just opened--a pleasant thing enough, as all the world assembled, and
there was a daily squeeze in the rooms. As for the articles we were
supposed to come to look at, they were below mediocrity--mere daubs,
mostly portraits, and many of British officers.

The 19th of May 1815 was with us a memorable day; our friend Sir
Augustus Frazer gave a grand, and a very good, dinner to all the
horse-artillery officers, English and German, on the occasion of his
being appointed lieutenant-colonel of that arm. The dinner was at
the Hôtel de la Paix, Place Royale; excellent claret, sauterne, and
champagne flowed in abundance, and the utmost hilarity prevailed.
Many of us then met for the first time, many after a separation of
years, and many for the last time. My friend Bolton sat next to me.
I had not seen him since we were cadets together, but a few weeks
afterwards he was gathered to his fathers on the field of Waterloo.
Frazer had promised me a bed at his friend’s (Lieutenant-Colonel
Maxwell, 21st) lodgings; accordingly, slipping away from the party, I
found my way thither somehow or other, and his servant showing me my
room I was soon fast asleep. From this I was aroused some time after
by persons coming into the room, and, to my infinite horror, found
that I had occupied the bed intended for Bob Cairns. A long dialogue
of regrets, &c. &c., ensued, but I continued obstinately to sleep, as
indignant at having been deceived as they were at my usurpation; so
in the morning I arose early, and left the house and explanation to
Sir Augustus. A few days afterwards poor Bob also was gathered to his
fathers. With an aching head I repaired to the beautiful promenade
on the ramparts, and made the circuit of the city, lingering about
in the fresh morning air until I thought people would be stirring,
and then adjourned to my friend Bell’s, where, being renovated by an
excellent breakfast, I mounted my horse and returned to Strytem--to
see Brussels no more.

For some time past it had been generally understood that our army
would advance into the French territory on or about the 20th June, in
anticipation of which event I sometimes amused myself speculating on
the probable events of the campaign. I drew out a written plan, in
which we were to fight three battles and arrive in sixteen days at
Paris, finishing by a grand _embrâsement_. This, as will be seen, was
in some measure prophetic, since three battles were fought (Quatre
Bras, Waterloo, and St Denis by the Prussians), and we did arrive in
sixteen days, and the catastrophe was with difficulty prevented by
the Duke.




CHAPTER X.


_May 29th._--Grand cavalry review near Grammont, in the fine meadows
on the banks of the Dender, for the use of which, it is said, as much
as £400 or £500 were paid.

The day was lovely, and we marched from Strytem in the cool of the
morning. The roads, although pretty good, were in places so cut up by
the passage of other troops before us, that it became necessary at
times to halt until our men filled up the holes with brushwood and
earth. About noon we arrived on the ground, than which nothing could
be more favourable for the purpose.

The Dender, flowing through a broad tract of rich meadow-land
perfectly flat, makes a bend from Grammont to the village of
Jedeghem, the ground on its left bank rising in a gentle slope,
whilst on the right the meadows extend back for about half a mile,
and then terminate at the foot of an abrupt wooded height, which
forms, as it were, a chord of the arc described by the river. This
was the arena chosen for the review, and a more favourable one could
scarcely have been chosen. We were formed in three lines. The first,
near the banks of the river, was composed of hussars in squadrons,
with wide intervals between them, and a battery of horse-artillery
(6-pounders) on either flank. Opposite the centre of this line was
a bridge (temporary, I believe) by which the cortège was to arrive
on the ground, descending from the village of Schendelbeke. The
second line--compact, or with only the usual squadron intervals--was
composed entirely of heavy dragoons, having two batteries--the one
of 24-pounder howitzers, the other of 9-pounders--in front of the
centre, and a battery of 9-pounders on either flank. The third was
a compact line like the second, but entirely of light dragoons,
supported also on either flank by a battery of 9-pounders.

It was a splendid spectacle. The scattered line of hussars in their
fanciful yet picturesque costume; the more sober, but far more
imposing, line of heavy dragoons, like a wall of red brick; and again
the serviceable and active appearance of the third line in their
blue uniforms, with broad lappels of white, buff, red, yellow, and
orange--the whole backed by the dark wood of the declivity already
mentioned--formed, indeed, a fine picture. There were, I understood,
about 6000 men on the field; and as I looked and admired their fine
appearance, complete equipment, and excellent horses, I wondered how
any troops could withstand their attacks, and wished Napoleon and
his chiefs could but see them as they stood. My wish was in part
gratified, for we afterwards learned beyond all question that numbers
of French officers had not only been present, but actually were so
in full uniform (many of them of high rank), and had mingled in the
cortège of the Duke, and so rode through the ranks--the safest plan
they could have pursued, it being impossible to say whether they
did or did not belong to the corps of the Duc de Berri, who, as I
said, still wore the imperial uniforms in which they had come over
to the royal party; and this was still more favoured by a ridiculous
scene which occasioned the absence of the French party from the
review. It was as follows: Arriving on the ground covered with dust,
the different corps had no sooner formed in their position, and
dismounted, than off went belts, canteens, and havresacks, and a
general brushing and scrubbing commenced; for the Duke, making no
allowance for dusty or muddy roads, expected to see all as clean as
if just turned out: accordingly, we had not only brought brushes,
&c., but even straw to wisp over the horses. The whole line was in
the midst of this business, many of the men even with jackets off,
when suddenly a forest of plumes and a galaxy of brilliant uniforms
came galloping down the slope from Schendelbeke towards the temporary
bridge. “The Duke!” “the Duke!” “the Duke’s coming!” ran along the
lines, and for a moment caused considerable bustle amongst the
people; but almost immediately this was discovered to be a mistake,
and the brushing and cleaning recommenced with more devotion than
ever; whilst the cavalcade, after slowly descending to the bridge and
debouching on the meadows, started at full gallop toward the saluting
point already marked out, the Duc de Berri, whom we now recognised,
keeping several yards ahead, no doubt that he might clearly be seen.
At this point he reined up and looked haughtily and impatiently about
him; and as we were now pretty intimate with his manner, it was easy
to see, even from our distant position, that he was in a passion. The
brushing, however, suffered no interruption, and no notice was taken
of his presence. One of his suite was now called up and despatched
to the front. What further took place I know not, but, certes! the
messenger no sooner returned than his Highness was off like a comet,
his tail streaming after him all the way up the slope, unable to keep
pace with him, for he rode like a madman, whilst a general titter
pervaded our lines as the report flew from one to the other that
Mounseer was off in a huff because we did not give him a general
salute. Many were the coarse jokes at his expense; and I was amused
at one of my drivers, who, holding up the collar from his horses
chest with one hand, whilst with the other he brushed away under it,
exclaimed, laughing aloud, “I wouldn’t be one of them ’ere French
fellows at drill upon the common to-morrow for a penny; if they’re
not properly bullyragged, I’m d----.” It turned out afterwards that
he had sent his aide-de-camp to claim the reception due to a prince
of the blood-royal, but Lord Uxbridge excused himself by saying he
had no instructions on that head, &c. &c. About two o’clock the Duke
of Wellington and Prince Blucher, followed by an immense cortège, in
which were to be seen many of the most distinguished officers and
almost every uniform in Europe, arrived on the ground. Need I say
that the foreigners were loud in praise of the martial air, fine
persons, and complete equipment of the men and horses, and of the
strength and beauty of the latter? and my vanity on that occasion was
most fully gratified, for on arriving where we stood, the Duke not
only called old Blucher’s attention to “the beautiful battery,” but,
instead of proceeding straight through the ranks, as they had done
everywhere else, each subdivision--nay, each individual horse--was
closely scrutinised, Blucher repeating continually that he had never
seen anything so superb in his life, and concluding by exclaiming,
“_Mein Gott, dere is not von orse in dies batterie wich is not goot
for Veldt Marshal_:” and Wellington agreed with him. It certainly was
a splendid collection of horses. However, except asking Sir George
Wood whose troop it was, his Grace never even bestowed a regard on
me as I followed from subdivision to subdivision. The review over,
and corps dismissed, I resigned my command to my second captain,
and proceeded direct to Ninove, Lord Uxbridge having invited all
commanding officers to meet his illustrious guests at dinner. On
repairing to the monastery, I found a numerous company assembled,
comprising some of the most distinguished characters in Europe.

The room in which we assembled, as well as the dining-room, was
of splendid dimensions, but totally void of ornament: plain white
stuccoed walls, and no furniture in the one but a few travelling
articles of our noble hosts; and in the other the dinner-table,
chairs, and benches of the most ordinary kind, evidently brought in
for the occasion. Long corridors running the whole length of the two
wings (standing at right angles to each other), with numerous rooms
of similar dimensions opening from them, seemed to be the plan of the
building. I suppose the dining-room must have been nearly 100 feet
long, nearly square, and about 18 or 20 feet high. In this the tables
were laid horse-shoe fashion. In the centre of the cross-table sat
Lord Uxbridge; on either hand Blucher and Wellington; then the Duke
of Brunswick; the hereditary Prince of Orange; his brother Prince
Frederick; Gneiseneau; Ziethen; Kleist; Dornberg; a Danish general
whose name I forget; Sir Frederick Arentschild, K.G.L. (the Duke of
Wellington’s favourite old hussar); Sir Sidney Smyth; Lords Hill,
Pack, Picton, Elly; and a host of illustrious names, foreign and
British, but not one Frenchman that I recollect. (Perhaps the affair
of the morning might have caused the absence of the Duc de Berri,
&c.) What names!--names familiar to every ear in the history of those
exciting times--names we pronounce with respect regarding those who
bear them as being removed above everyday life. But to have sat at
table with them, to have heard them called out in the familiarity of
everyday conversation--how strange! One can hardly imagine himself
thoroughly awake on such occasions. But to return.

It was my good fortune to sit between Colonel Sir F. Arentschild and
another no less celebrated officer of the German Legion, Lieutenant
Strenuwitz, a Pole by birth, who had signalised himself on more than
one occasion in the Peninsula by attacking and capturing outposts.
We broke up at an early hour (too early, I think, for old Blucher,
who seemed to enjoy himself much), and retired to another room, where
coffee was served, and after some little conversation we dispersed.
In leaving the dining-room the Duke of Wellington stopped for a few
minutes to converse with old Arentschild, and, pinned in a corner by
them, I had time to contemplate, well and closely, our great leader.
At that time he certainly had not a grey hair in his head.

It was getting dusk when I mounted my horse to return home, and the
people were beginning to discharge squibs and crackers on the street
of Ninove; the houses were decorated with garlands of laurel and
green boughs, so that everything wore an air of festivity.

_May 30th._--How delightful the tranquillity of Strytem appears after
the stir and bustle of yesterday! The fields look more gay, the
woods and pleasure-grounds more lovely than ever. Yesterday morning
was passed amidst the din of arms and pomp of war--amidst crowds
of crested warriors and the clang of martial music--the evening in
festivity, amidst magnates of the earth.

How differently has this lovely day glided by! The morning I
passed in a quiet peaceable ride amidst the charming scenery of
the neighbourhood--wandering through corn-fields, orchards, and
hop-grounds, and exploring the shady recesses of the Bois de
Liederkerke; the evening in voluptuous indolence, sauntering up and
down under the magnificent beeches of the great avenue, indulging
in fairy dreams, and listening to the rural sound that, from time
to time, broke on the stillness of the hour, whilst the smoke of
my cigar hung in wreaths around me as I occasionally stopped to
contemplate the scene. No living soul interrupted the solitude,
except once the gardener’s son, in his blue smock-frock, wooden
shoes, and dirty night-cap, with a long rusty old gun under his arm
and a short pipe in his mouth, crossed the avenue, marched up the
central path of the garden, and disappeared amongst the thickets of
the _pleasaunce_ beyond. He went, I knew (for he always said so),
to the Chasse aux Lièvres for the supply of our table; but as that
was badly supplied, we might have fancied our gamekeeper a bad shot,
had not our worthy doctor one evening (for what purpose he could
best say) also taken a ramble in the said _pleasaunce_, where, to
his infinite surprise, he stumbled upon our chasseur making love
to his sister’s _adjointe_ (a great Flanderkin of a Maritornes),
which instantly explained the deficiency of supply. There he went
then, as I said, for either purpose--his short pipe leaving a long
gossamer-like film of smoke behind him. And this digression brings me
to the close of this delightful day.

The genial month of May thus terminated amidst the delightful
enjoyments of a country life, and June commenced under happy
auspices, little dreaming of the far different scenes we were
destined to witness ere yet another month had passed.

The only event that marked this period of our tranquil, even-flowing
existence was the removal of our 1st division from the chateau farm,
in compliance with the urgent request of the farmer (Walsdragen), to
the pretty village of Yseringen, about a mile off, on the hill above
us. I regretted this separation of the troop, but could not withstand
the poor man’s solicitations, who expected every hour his wife’s
_accouchement_. As for the division, it benefited by the change.
The officer (Leathes) got most excellent quarters in a comfortable
well-furnished chateau, whilst his men and horses were equally well
lodged in the adjoining farm. Poor Walsdragen, however, could not
enjoy this relief, for, a few days after, the impending event took
place, and he lost his wife. I shall not forget in a hurry this
melancholy circumstance, for I charged myself with unkindness towards
him in his affliction by having so long withstood his solicitations
to be relieved of our people. I was walking in the avenue, as usual,
after dinner, enjoying my weed; the evening was calm and serene,
the sun just setting; no sound disturbed the stillness save the
hum of insects or the croaking of the frogs. Suddenly one of the
most terrific shrieks I ever heard burst forth, until the woods
rang again. At first, startled as I was, there was no saying whence
the sound came, and taking my cigar from my mouth, I had scarcely
assumed a listening attitude when, again and again, it was repeated
in a manner so appalling as to make my very flesh creep. It evidently
proceeded from the farm; but what could occasion such horrid cries?
This time they were succeeded by loud lamentations of many voices,
male and female. I hurried towards the farm, hardly knowing what to
conjecture. The first idea that flashed on me was an irruption of
some French party, who were plundering, murdering, &c. &c., and this,
in the first instance, seemed in some measure borne out when several
men, without hats, came rushing out of the farmyard with lamentable
cries, and passing by me without notice, proceeded to the bridge of
the chateau, and there, throwing themselves on their knees before an
image of the Virgin and child standing in a niche outside the chapel
already mentioned, commenced a most dolorous mixture of lamentation
and half-chanted supplication--part of a litany, I presume. I stood
somewhat puzzled. After a few minutes of this devotional exercise,
one of them ran away and brought a spade, with which he cut a large
sod, and the whole party hurried back to the house, carrying it
with them. At this moment St Cyr (one of our farmers, and the best
amongst them) came up, and, making Mynheer Walsdragen’s compliments,
reported from him, and at his desire, the death of his wife, which
had just taken place--a strange piece of etiquette at such a moment.
The sod, I learned, was to put under her head, an ancient practice
invariably observed.

My first idea of an irruption of the enemy did not seem just now
quite so improbable, for we almost daily heard a good deal of firing
in the direction of Mons, and the peasantry were continually bringing
accounts of movements of the French army, none of which ever proved
true; and the firing, we afterwards learned, proceeded from the
practice of the Dutch or Belgic artillery at Mons.

Our host, the Baron van Lombeke, paid us a visit about the beginning
of this month for the first time. The ostensible motive for this
visit was an inspection of the roads, which he said were immediately
to be put in a complete state of repair. He stayed three or four days
with us, during which his excursions never extended further than the
major’s or the curé’s, so that he saw but little of the roads--which,
together with the circumstance of his having arrived only a few days
before from Paris, induced a suspicion that his real business was
of a very different nature--possibly to ascertain the strength and
positions of our cavalry corps, or something of the sort.

It seemed odd enough receiving a man as a guest in his own house;
our servants prepared a room for him, and he was waited upon by the
old gardener. Of course he dined, or rather supped, with us; for
I believe he usually partook of the curé’s dinner at one o’clock.
Although what we should call rather vulgar-looking, yet we found
M. le Baron exceedingly well-informed, perfectly the gentleman in
manners, and upon the whole an agreeable acquisition to our little
party. His gardens, and everything about the place, he begged us to
consider as our own. We had done so already; however, we took the
thing as it was meant--a mere compliment; but we felt that there was
more sincerity in the contrast he drew between ourselves and the
Prussians, and the repeated assertions of his satisfaction in having
his chateau occupied by us instead of by them.

Finding me in want of books, he kindly promised to send me some from
Brussels; and I was agreeably surprised at his punctuality, when, a
day or two after his departure, the old gardener brought me the five
volumes of ‘The Hermit of the Chaussée d’Antin’--a work new to me,
and to which I was indebted for several most agreeable evenings.

The day marked for our advance into France now approached; and
although no confirmation of the rumour reached us, yet we began to
prepare for it as confidently as if already given out in general
orders. Meantime, as will be seen, our friends beyond the border were
scrutinising our intentions pretty closely.

It was on the evening of the 15th June, and about sunset or a
little later, that an officer of hussars rode into the village
of Yseringen, Leathes being at the time at dinner with me at our
chateau. He was dressed as our hussars usually were when riding
about the country--blue frock, scarlet waistcoat laced with gold,
pantaloons, and forage-cap of the 7th Hussars. He was mounted on a
smart pony, with plain saddle and bridle; was without sword or sash,
and carried a small whip;--in short, his costume and _monture_ were
correct in every particular. Moreover, he aped to the very life that
“devil-may-care” _nonchalant_ air so frequently characterising our
young men of fashion. Seeing some of our gunners standing at the
door of a house, he desired them to go for their officer, as he
wished to see him. They called the sergeant, who told him that the
officer was not in the village. In an authoritative tone he then
demanded how many men and horses were quartered there, whose troop
they belonged to, where the remainder of the troop was quartered,
and of what it consisted? When all these questions were answered,
he told the sergeant that he had been sent by Lord Uxbridge to
order accommodation to be provided for two hundred horses, and
that ours must consequently be put up as close as possible. The
sergeant replied that there was not room in the village for a single
additional horse. “Oh, we’ll soon see that,” said he; pointing to
one of the men who stood by, “Do you go and tell the _maire_ to come
instantly to me.” The _maire_ came, and confirmed the sergeant’s
statement, upon which our friend, flying into a passion, commenced
in excellent French to abuse the poor functionary like a pickpocket,
threatening to send a whole regiment into the village; and then,
after a little further conversation with the sergeant, he mounted
his pony and rode off just as Leathes returned to the village. Upon
reporting the circumstance to the officer, the sergeant stated that
he thought this man had appeared anxious to avoid him, having
ridden off rather in a hurry when he appeared, which, together with
a slight foreign accent, then for the first time excited a suspicion
of his being a spy, which had not occurred to the sergeant before,
as he knew there were several foreign officers in our hussars, and
that the 10th was actually then commanded by one--Colonel Quentin.
The suspicion was afterwards confirmed, for upon inquiry I found
that no officer had been sent by Lord Uxbridge on any such mission.
Our friend deserved to escape, for he was a bold and clever fellow.
A brother emissary, however, who visited Lombeke Notre Dame the
same evening, was not quite so prudent nor so fortunate, for he was
caught by the sentinel in the act of examining the guns of Sinclair’s
Brigade by aid of a dark-lantern and made prisoner; but in the
hubbub of marching the next morning made his escape, and was heard
of no more. We afterwards learned that a number of officers had been
sent the same evening into our cantonments to ascertain whether we
remained quiet, &c. &c.

Spite of my eagerness for more active service, it was not without
regret that I saw the time approach when I expected to leave for ever
the tranquil abode of Strytem; and some such thoughts occupied me
this very evening (_15th_), as I sauntered about the great avenue
after Leathes had left me. Most of the other officers had gone to
the ball at Brussels, and I remained quite alone. The balmy softness
of the air, the beauty and repose of the scenery, were, I thought,
more exquisite than ever; and I continued in the avenue until the
increasing obscurity of the evening drove me in to enjoy an hour or
two with ‘The Hermit of the Chaussée D’Antin’; ere I retired for the
night.




CHAPTER XI.


_June 16th._--It would appear that our Quartermaster-General of
the cavalry took a peculiar pleasure in disturbing people at very
unseasonable hours. He served me so at Dendermonde, and now he has
done precisely the same at Strytem. As on that occasion, I was
sound asleep when my servant, bustling into the room, awoke me
_en sursaut_. He brought a note which an orderly hussar had left,
and ridden off immediately. The note had nothing official in its
appearance, and might have been an invitation to dinner; but the
unceremonious manner in which the hussar had gone off without his
receipt looked curious. My despatch was totally deficient in date, so
that time and place were left to conjecture; its contents pithy--they
were as follows, viz.:--

  “Captain Mercer’s troop will proceed with the utmost diligence
  to Enghien, where he will meet Major M‘Donald, who will point out
  the ground on which it is to bivouac to-night.

                                                 “Signed,   * * *
                                                      D.A.Q.M.-Gen.”

That we were to move forward, then, was certain. It was rather
sudden, to be sure, and all the whys and wherefores were left
to conjecture; but the suddenness of it, and the importance of
arriving quickly at the appointed place, rather alarmed me, for
upon reflection I remembered that I had been guilty of two or three
imprudences. First, all my officers were absent; secondly, all my
country waggons were absent; thirdly, a whole division (one-third
of my troop) was absent at Yseringen. “_Send the sergeant-major
here_,” was the first order, as I drew on my stockings. “_Send for Mr
Coates_” (my commissariat officer), the second, as I got one leg into
my overalls. “_William, make haste and get breakfast_,” the third,
as I buttoned them up. The sergeant-major soon came, and received
his orders to turn out instanter, with the three days’ provisions
and forage[11] in the havresacks and on the horses; also to send
an express for the first division. He withdrew, and immediately the
fine martial clang of “boot-and-saddle” resounded through the village
and courts of the chateau, making the woods ring again, and even the
frogs stop to listen.

The commissary soon made his appearance. “What! are we off, sir?”
“Yes, without delay; and you must collect your waggons as quickly as
possible.” “I fear, Captain Mercer, that will take some time, for St
Cyr’s are gone to Ninove.” My folly here stared me full in the face.
Mr Coates said he would do his utmost to collect them; and as he was
a most active, intelligent, and indefatigable fellow, I communicated
to him my orders and determination not to wait, desiring him to
follow us as soon as he possibly could. My first-enumerated care was
speedily removed, for I learned that the officers had just arrived
and were preparing for the march, having known of it at Brussels ere
we did. The two divisions in Strytem were ready to turn out in a few
minutes after the “boot-and-saddle” had resounded, but, as I feared,
the first kept us waiting until near seven o’clock before it made its
appearance. This delay allowed us time to make a hearty breakfast;
and, in the uncertainty of when we should get another meal, we each
stowed away a double portion of Walsdragen’s fine eggs. At length the
first division arrived, and the animating and soul-stirring notes
of the “turn-out” again awoke the echoes of the hills and woods. Up
jumped my old dog Bal, and away to parade and increase the bustle
by jumping at the horses’ noses and barking, as parade formed. Away
went the officers to inspect their divisions, and Milward is leading
my impatient charger Cossac up and down the court. I linger to take
a last look of my antique apartment, and bid farewell to my mute
companions the Van Voldens.

The gardener, his son, and Mdlle. Mon-père-dit, with her pale face
rendered still paler by the agitation of the morning, stand drawn up
in the court, precisely in the same order and on the same ground as
on the day of our arrival. With a profusion of blessings, &c., they
thank me for the great care we have taken of the chateau, and for the
very liberal gratuity which our paymaster, the doctor (Hitchins),
had bestowed upon them. They wish me all manner of success, but
fear we shall have bloody work. The old man mutters something about
Buonaparte _capôte_, which I do not understand, but take for granted
is something friendly, so return thanks, mount my horse, and, once
more, adieu Strytem.

We had cleared the village and marched some miles well enough,
being within the range of my daily rides; but, this limit passed, I
was immediately sensible of another error--that of having started
without a guide, for the roads became so numerous, intricate, and
bad, often resembling only woodmen’s tracks, that I was sorely
puzzled, spite of the map I carried in my _sabretache_, to pick
out my way. But a graver error still I had now to reproach myself
with, and one that might have been attended with fatal consequences.
Eager to get on, and delayed by the badness of the roads, I left
all my ammunition-waggons behind, under charge of old Hall, my
quartermaster-sergeant, to follow us, and then pushed on with the
guns alone, thus foolishly enough dividing my troops into three
columns--viz., the guns, ammunition-waggons, and the column of
provision waggons under the commissary. For this piece of folly I
paid dearly in the anxiety I suffered throughout this eventful day,
which at times was excessive.

Rid of all encumbrances, we trotted merrily on whenever the road
permitted, and, arriving at Castre (an old Roman legionary station),
found there the 23d Light Dragoons just turning out, having also
received orders to march upon Enghien. A Captain Dance, with whom I
rode a short distance, told me he had been at the ball at Brussels
last night, and that, when he left the room, the report was that
Blucher had been attacked in the morning, but that he had repulsed
the enemy with great slaughter, was following up the blow, and that
our advance was to support him. The road for the last few miles had
been upon a more elevated country, not so wooded--a sort of plateau,
consequently hard and dry; but immediately on passing Castre, we
came to a piece which appeared almost impassable for about a hundred
yards--a perfect black bog, across which a corduroy road had been
made, but not kept in repair, consequently the logs, having decayed,
left immense gaps. The 23d floundered through this with difficulty,
and left us behind. How we got through with our 9-pounders, the
horses slipping up to the shoulders between the logs every minute,
I know not; but through we did get, and without accident, but it
took time to do so. About noon, after threading our way through
more mud and many watery lanes, doubtful if we were in the right
direction, we came out upon a more open and dry country close to a
park, which, upon inquiry, proved to be that of Enghien. To the
same point various columns of cavalry were converging, and under the
park wall we found Sir Ormsby Vandeleur’s brigade of light dragoons,
dismounted and feeding their horses. Here we also dismounted to
await the arrival of Major M‘Donald; and as I looked upon the day’s
march as finished, deferred feeding until our bivouac should be
established--another folly, for an officer in campaign should never
lose an opportunity of feeding, watering, or resting his horses, &c.
Attracted by the novelty of the scene and the fineness of the day,
we had numerous gay visitors here--ladies and gentlemen--who had
stationed themselves within the park, enhancing by their presence
the gaiety of the scene, for we had halted immediately under the
park wall, and at the point where the road to Braine le Comte by
Steenkerke branched off from the one we were on. All the corps as
they arrived, I observed, took this road, and continued onwards,
which made me somewhat impatient lest I should have halted short
of my destination. Having waited a good half-hour, and no Major
M‘Donald appearing, I began to look about for some one who could
give me information, but no staff-officer was to be seen, and no
one else knew anything about the matter. Corps after corps arrived
and passed on, generally without even halting, yet all professing
ignorance of their destination. Pleasant situation this! Sir Ormsby’s
dragoons were by this time bridling up their horses and rolling up
their nosebags, evidently with the intention of moving off. Seeing
this, I sought out the general, whom I found seated against the bank,
that, instead of a hedge, bordered the road. Whether naturally a
savage, or that he feared committing himself, I know not, but Sir
Ormsby cut my queries short with an asperity totally uncalled for. “I
know nothing about you, sir! I know nothing at all about you!” “But
you will perhaps have the goodness to tell me where you are going
yourself?” “I know nothing at all about it, sir! I told you already
I know nothing at all about _you_!” and starting abruptly from his
seat, my friend mounted his horse, and (I suppose by instinct) took
the road towards Steenkerke, followed by his brigade, leaving me
and mine alone in the road, more disagreeably situated than ever.
I now began to reflect very seriously on the “_to stay_” or “_not
to stay_.” In the former case I bade fair to have the ground all to
myself, for although everybody I spoke to denied having any orders,
yet all kept moving in one and the same direction. In the latter
case, my orders in writing certainly were to stay; but circumstances
might have occurred since to change this, and the new order might not
have reached me. Moreover, it was better to get into a scrape for
fighting than keeping out of the way, so I made up my mind to move
forward too. Accordingly I had already mounted my people when Sir
H. Vivian’s brigade of hussars, followed by Major Bull’s troop of
our horse-artillery, passed. Bull I found was, like myself, without
orders, but he thought it best to stick close to the cavalry, and
advised me to do the same, which I did, following him and them on
the road to Steenkerke. The country about this place appeared more
bare and forbidding than any I had yet seen in the Pays Bas. Just as
we moved off, the column of Household troops made its appearance,
advancing from Ninove, and taking the same direction.

It was now that the recollection of my absent waggons began to
torment me, and I actually feared never to see them again. However,
there was no help for it now, and I continued onward.

A few miles farther we crossed the Senne by an old stone bridge,
and about four in the afternoon arrived at Braine le Comte, almost
ravenous with hunger, and roasted alive by the burning sun under
which we had been marching all day. The country had improved and
become more wooded, so that the town looked pretty, surrounded as it
is by gardens and trees. We were not allowed (why, I know not) to
see more; for on arriving at one end of it we turned into a road on
the left, and so, making a circuit round the back of the gardens,
came out at the other end on a piece of bare ground, where we found
several regiments drawn up in close columns, dismounted and feeding.
It was somewhere between Enghien and Braine le Comte that we met an
aide-de-camp (I believe one of the Duke’s) posting away as fast as
his poor tired beast could get along, and dressed in his embroidered
suit, white pantaloons, &c. &c., having evidently mounted as he left
the ball-room. This, I remember, struck us at the time as rather odd,
but we had no idea of the real state of our affairs.

We had formed up, and were feeding also, but the nosebags were
scarcely put on the poor horses’ heads than the cavalry corps,
mounting again, moved off, one after the other, and we were
constrained to follow ere the animals had half finished. Here, as
before, I could obtain no intelligence respecting our march, the
direction and meaning of which all I spoke to professed a profound
ignorance. Whilst halting, Hitchins, slipping into the town, brought
us out a couple of bottles of wine, the which we passed round from
one to the other without any scruple about sucking it all out of
one muzzle. This renewal of our march was a sad disappointment, for
on finding the cavalry assembled here, we made sure they were only
waiting until the different bivouacs could be arranged, when we
should settle ourselves for the night.

In marching round the town, many of the houses had a sort of gallery
behind them, which were filled with spectators, particularly many
priests. The gardens were very pretty, and I could not but contrast
the comparative luxury of these people, snug and comfortable, and
sure of their bed when night came on, with our own vagabond situation.

The country beyond Braine le Comte was pretty, the usual rich and
wooded champaign extending to the foot of an abrupt ridge of hills,
covered with forest to the summit, and toward which our road lay.

A little hamlet (Long Tour, I think) lay at the foot of the
hills, the straggling street of which we found so crowded with
baggage-waggons of some Hanoverian or other foreign corps, that for
a long while we were unable to pass. The cavalry, therefore, left
us behind, for they broke into the adjoining fields until they had
cleared the impediment. Although annoyed at being thus hindered,
I could not but admire the lightness, and even elegance, of the
little waggons, with their neat white tilts, and as neat and pretty
_jungfrauen_ who were snugly seated under them. We found the ascent
of the hills more difficult than we expected, the road, which went up
in a zigzag (indeed, it could not have been otherwise), little better
than a woodman’s track, much cut up, and exceedingly steep--so much
so, that we found it necessary to double-horse all our carriages,
by taking only half up at once. This delayed us considerably; but,
impatient as I was to get on, I was pleased at not being hurried
through this charming forest-scenery. The hills, as I said, rose
abruptly, and with a very steep acclivity, their sides being covered
with noble forest-trees, amongst the boles of which the eye ranged
without impediment--there being little or no underwood--occasionally
catching glimpses through the foliage of the rich and varied plain
which we had left, and of the grey buildings of Braine le Comte
embosomed in verdure. Groups of dragoons and hussars, mingling with
our guns, &c., all scrambling up the steep ascent, seen amongst the
gigantic trunks of the trees and by the softened light of the forest,
presented delicious pictures. Nor were these less interesting from
the accompanying sounds--the dull tramp of the horses, the rattling
of sabres, and the voices of command, all magnified by the echo
of the forest, which was such that one might have fancied himself
speaking under a vault.

At length the whole of our carriages were on the summit, but we
were now quite alone, all the cavalry having gone on; and thus we
continued our march on an elevated plateau, still covered with
forest,[12] thicker and more gloomy than ever--here and there passing
a farm and small clearing of a few fields, and then again plunging
into the cool dark woods. At one of these farms I got a draught of
new milk--very grateful after such a hot march and long fast. At
length we had crossed the forest, and found ourselves on the verge of
a declivity which stretched away less abruptly than the one we had
ascended, consequently presenting a more extensive slope, down which
our road continued. A most extensive view lay before us; and now for
the first time, as emerging from the woods, we became sensible of
a dull, sullen sound that filled the air, somewhat resembling that
of a distant water-mill, or still more distant thunder. On clearing
the wood, it became more distinct, and its character was no longer
questionable--heavy firing of cannon and musketry, which could now
be distinguished from each other plainly. We could also hear the
musketry in volleys and independent firing. The extensive view below
us was bounded towards the horizon by a dark line of wood, above
which, in the direction of the cannonade, volumes of grey smoke
arose, leaving no doubt of what was going on. The object of our march
was now evident, and we commenced descending the long slope with an
animation we had not felt before.

It was here that Major M‘Donald overtook us, and without adverting to
the bivouac at Enghien, of which probably he had never heard, gave me
orders to attach myself to the Household brigade, under Lord Edward
Somerset, but no instructions where or when. I took care not to tell
him they were in the rear, lest he might order us to halt for them,
which would have been a sore punishment to people excited as we now
were by the increasing roar of the battle evidently going on, and
hoped that by marching faster they might soon overtake us. Just at
this moment a cabriolet, driving at a smart pace, passed us. In it
was seated an officer of the Guards, coat open and snuffbox in hand.
I could not but admire the perfect _nonchalance_ with which my man
was thus hurrying forward to join in a bloody combat--much, perhaps,
in the same manner, though certainly not in the same costume, as he
might drive to Epsom or Ascot Heath. The descent terminated in a
picturesque hollow, with a broad pool, dark and calm, and beyond it
an old mill, perfectly in keeping with the scene. The opportunity of
watering our poor brutes was too good to be missed, and I accordingly
ordered a halt for that purpose. Whilst so employed, an aide-de-camp,
descending from a singular knoll above us, on which I had noticed a
group of officers looking out with their glasses in the direction of
the battle, came to summons me to Sir Hussey Vivian, who was one of
them.

On ascending the knoll, Sir Hussey called to me in a hurried manner
to make haste. “Who do you belong to?” said he. I told him, as also
that the brigade was yet in the rear. “Well,” he replied, “never
mind; there is something serious going on, to judge from that heavy
firing, and artillery must be wanted; therefore bring up your guns
as fast as you can, and join my hussars: can you keep up?” “I hope
so, sir.” “Well, come along without delay; we must move smartly.” In
a few minutes our people, guns and all, were on the hill. The hussars
mounted, set off at a brisk trot, and we followed. Alas! thought I,
where are my ammunition-waggons? Neither this anxiety, however, nor
the excitement of the moment, were sufficient to shut my eyes to the
beautiful picture on that knoll. Conceive a point of ground standing
forth with precipitous slopes over the hollow already mentioned, with
its picturesque mill and calm glassy pool; on this ground, happily
grouped, a band of warriors, in dresses not less picturesque, beneath
a huge cross of the rudest workmanship; a few Salvator-like trees
complete the foreground, the distance presenting a rich and varied
scene of corn-fields (now yellow), and pastures of the liveliest
green, and sombre wood--the whole extending away till in the distance
all the features are massed and mellowed into indistinctness and
purply vapour. Such was the scene. The hussars, to lighten their
horses, untied the nets containing their hay, and the mouths of their
corn-bags, which falling from them as they trotted on, the road was
soon covered with hay and oats. We did not follow their example, and,
although dragging with us 9-pounders, preserved our forage, and also
our place in the column.

By-and-by a large town appeared in front of us, and the increasing
intensity of the cannonade, and volumes of smoke about the trees, led
us to suppose the battle near at hand, and on the hill just beyond
the town. This town was Nivelle.

Another beautiful scene, and one full of excitement, now presented
itself. We were descending by a gentle slope toward Nivelle, which
lay spread out before us--its towers and masses of building,
especially what appeared to be the ruins of an ancient castle,
sweetly touched by the golden light of the setting sun, whilst the
greater part lay in deep-toned purple obscurity. Fine trees, with
dark overhanging foliage, bordering the road, formed a foreground and
frame, as it were, to this picture. Beyond the town the ground rose,
also in shadowy obscurity, crowned with sombre woods, over which
ascended the greyish blue smoke of the battle, now apparently so near
that we fancied we could hear the shouts of the combatants--a fancy
strengthened by crowds of people on the heights, whom we mistook for
troops--inhabitants of Nivelle, as we soon discovered, seeking to
get a sight of the fearful tragedy then enacting. Before entering
the town we halted for a moment, lighted our slow matches, put shot
into our leathern cartouches, loaded the guns with powder, and stuck
priming wires into the vents to prevent the cartridges slipping
forward, and, thus prepared for immediate action, again moved on.

On entering the town what a scene presented itself! How different
from the repose of the country we had been traversing all day! There
all was peace and tranquillity, undisturbed--absolutely undisturbed,
except by the hurried march of successive columns along the highroad.
There the rustic pursued his wonted labours as in profound peace,
the mill went its rumbling round, the birds carolled on the spray.
True, the sounds of battle came borne on the evening breeze--the
brattle of musketry and the boom of cannon shook the air; but it
was distant--very distant--and might be heard, and the ascending
smoke seen, with that sort of thrilling sensation with which we
witness the progress of the storm when we ourselves are secure from
its effects. Here, on the contrary, all was confusion, agitation,
and movement. The danger was impending; explosion after explosion,
startling from their vicinity, and clattering peals of musketry, like
those lengthened thunder-claps which announce to us so awfully the
immediate neighbourhood of the electric cloud. The whole population
of Nivelle was in the streets, doors and windows all wide open,
whilst the inmates of the houses, male and female, stood huddled
together in little groups like frightened sheep, or were hurrying
along with the distracted air of people uncertain where they are
going, or what they are doing. The scene was strangely interesting.
In a sort of square which we traversed, a few soldiers, with the air
of citizens (probably a municipal guard), were drawn up in line,
looking anxiously about them at the numerous bleeding figures which
we now began to meet. Some were staggering along unaided, the blood
falling from them in large drops as they went. One man we met was
wounded in the head; pale and ghastly, with affrighted looks and
uncertain step, he evidently knew little of where he was, or what
passed about him, though still he staggered forward, the blood
streaming down his face on to the greatcoat which he wore rolled over
his left shoulder. An anxious crowd was collecting round him as we
passed on. Then came others supported between two comrades, their
faces deadly pale, and knees yielding at every step. At every step,
in short, we met numbers, more or less wounded, hurrying along in
search of that assistance which many would never live to receive, and
others receive too late. Priests were running to and fro, hastening
to assist at the last moments of a dying man; all were in haste--all
wore that abstracted air so inseparable from those engaged in an
absorbing pursuit. There were women, too, mingling in this scene of
agitation. Ladies, fair delicate ladies, stood on the steps at the
doors of several handsome houses, their hands folded before them, as
if in the agony of suspense, and with an air of deprecation, their
eyes wandering over the excited crowd, whilst ever and anon they
would move their lips as if in prayer. I thought as we passed along
they looked at us, and prayed for our safety and success. I gave
them credit for it, at least, and the very idea had the effect of
inspiration. Strange that the sight--nay, often the recollection--of
all that is tender and compassionate, of woman, should have the
effect of stimulating us to martial deeds. The little knots of
excited citizens assembled on our route would cease their energetic
declamations, and turn to look at us as we passed along. Many would
run up, and, patting our horses’ necks, would call down benedictions
on us, and bid us hasten to the fight ere it were yet too late, or
utter trembling and not loud shouts of “Vivent les Anglais!” A few
there were who stood apart, with gloomy discontented looks, eyeing
their fellow-citizens with evident contempt, and us with scowls, not
unmixed with derision, as they marked our dusty and jaded appearance.
Through all this crowd we held our way, and soon began to ascend
the hill beyond the town, where we entered a fine chaussée bordered
by elms, expecting every moment to enter on the field of action,
the roar of which appeared quite close to us. It was, however, yet
distant.

The road was covered with soldiers, many of them wounded, but also
many apparently untouched. The numbers thus leaving the field
appeared extraordinary. Many of the wounded had six, eight, ten, and
even more, attendants. When questioned about the battle, and why they
left it, the answer was invariably, “Monsieur, tout est perdu! les
Anglais sont abimés, en déroute, abimés, tous, tous, tous!” and then,
nothing abashed, these fellows would resume their hurried route. My
countrymen will rejoice to learn that amongst this dastardly crew not
one Briton appeared. Whether they were of Nassau or Belgians, I know
not; they were one or the other--I think the latter. One red-coat
we did meet--not a fugitive though, for he was severely wounded.
This man was a private of the 92d (Gordon Highlanders), a short,
rough, hardy-looking fellow, with the national high cheek-bones, and
a complexion that spoke of many a bivouac. He came limping along,
evidently with difficulty and suffering. I stopped him to ask news
of the battle, telling him what I had heard from the others. “Na,
na, sir, it’s aw a damned lee; they war fechtin’ yat an I laft ’em;
but it’s a bludy business, and thar’s na saying fat may be the end
on’t. Oor ragiment was nigh clean swapt off, and oor Colonel kilt
jist as I cam awa.” Upon inquiring about his own wound, we found
that a musket-ball had lodged in his knee, or near it; accordingly
Hitchins, dismounting, seated him on the parapet of a little bridge
we happened to be on, extracted the ball in a few minutes, and,
binding up the wound, sent him hobbling along towards Nivelle,
not having extracted a single exclamation from the poor man, who
gratefully thanked him as he resumed his way. A little further on,
and as it began to grow dusk, we traversed the village of Hautain le
Val, where a very different scene presented itself. Here, in a large
cabaret by the roadside, we saw through the open windows the rooms
filled with soldiers, cavalry and infantry; some standing about in
earnest conversation, others seated round tables, smoking, carousing,
and thumping the board with clenched fists, as they related with loud
voices--what?--most likely their own gallant exploits. About the door
their poor horses, tied to a rail, showed by their drooping heads,
shifting legs, and the sweat drying and fuming on their soiled coats,
that their exertions at least had been of no trivial nature.




CHAPTER XII.


The firing began to grow slacker, and even intermitting, as we
entered on the field of Quatre Bras--our horses stumbling from time
to time over corpses of the slain, which they were too tired to step
over. The shot and shells which flew over our line of march from time
to time (some of the latter bursting beyond us) were sufficient to
enable us to say we had been _in_ the battle of Quatre Bras, for such
was the name of the place where we now arrived, just too late to be
useful. In all directions the busy hum of human voices was heard;
the wood along the skirts of which we marched re-echoed clearly and
loudly the tones of the bugle, which ever and anon were overpowered
by the sullen roar of cannon, or the sharper rattle of musketry; dark
crowds of men moved in the increasing obscurity of evening, and the
whole scene seemed alive with them. What a moment of excitement and
anxiety as we proceeded amongst all this tumult, and amidst the dead
and dying, ignorant as yet how the affair had terminated! Arrived at
a mass of buildings, where four roads met (_les quatre bras_), Major
M‘Donald again came up with orders for us to bivouac on an adjoining
field, where, accordingly, we established ourselves amongst the
remains of a wheat crop.

Our men dismounted, and the horses tied up to the wheels of the
carriages, every one was despatched with canteens and water-buckets
to a well at the farm, to procure water for themselves and horses.
This being the only water in the immediate neighbourhood, the crowd
of all arms was so great about it that our people were employed fully
two hours after halting ere they had completed watering their horses.
They were then fed with corn, whilst eating which, a patch of wheat
still standing was discovered near our bivouac. This we immediately
cut or pulled up, and thus saved our hay, for there was sufficient
to employ the poor brutes all night, if they preferred eating to
sleeping.

Our animals cared for, the next consideration was ourselves. The
men had provisions ready cooked in their havresacks, and therefore
soon made themselves comfortable; but we had nothing, could procure
nothing, and were likely to go supperless to bed. We had assembled in
a little circle, discussing the events of the day previous to lying
down, when, to our no small joy, the doctor made his appearance,
followed by one of the servants bearing the remnant of a large
meat-pie that yesterday had formed _part_ of our dinner at Strytem,
and which he, with laudable zeal and presence of mind, had in the
hurry-scurry of the morning thrust into our little cart, thinking,
good man, it might prove useful. No one can doubt that it did so in
a degree; but the sixth part of the _remnant_ of a pie went little
way to satisfy the cravings of our stomachs, which had had so long
a holiday. However, it was something, and we were grateful for it,
and thankful to our worthy Esculapius for having been so provident.
The meal ended and cigars lighted, we sat enveloped in our cloaks,
chatting and listening to the Babel-like confusion at the well, where
crowds were still struggling for water, until, one by one, we sank on
the ground, overcome by sleep, which for my part remained unbroken
until the grey dawn began to peep of the

_17th June_, when a popping fire of musketry, apparently close at
hand, aroused me again to consciousness of my situation. At first
I could not imagine where I was. I looked straight up, and the
stars were twinkling over me in a clear sky. I put out a hand from
beneath my cloak, and felt clods of damp earth and stalks of straw.
The brattle of musketry increased, and then the consciousness of
my situation came gradually over me. Although somewhat chilly, I
was still drowsy, and, regardless of what might be going on, had
turned on my side and began to doze again, when one of my neighbours
started up with the exclamation, “I wonder what all that firing
means!” This in an instant dispelled all desire to sleep; and up
I got too, mechanically repeating his words, and rubbing my eyes
as I began to peer about. One of the first, and certainly the most
gratifying, sights that met my inquiring gaze, was Quartermaster
Hall, who had arrived during the night with all his charge safe and
sound. He had neither seen nor heard, however, of Mr Coates and his
train of country waggons, for whom I began now to entertain serious
apprehensions. From whatever the musketry might proceed, we could see
nothing--not even the flashes; but the increasing light allowed me to
distinguish numberless dark forms on the ground all around me, people
slumbering still, regardless of the firing that had aroused me. At
a little distance numerous white discs, which were continually in
motion, changing place and disappearing, to be succeeded by others,
puzzled me exceedingly, and I could not even form a conjecture as
to what they might be. Watching them attentively, I was still more
surprised when some of these white objects ascended from the ground
and suddenly disappeared; but the mystery was soon explained by the
increasing light, which gave to my view a corps of Nassau troops
lying on the ground, having white tops to their shakos. Daylight
now gradually unfolded to us our situation. We were on a plateau
which had been covered with corn, now almost everywhere trodden
down. Four roads, as already mentioned, met a little to the right
of our front, and just at that point stood a farmhouse, which, with
its outbuildings, yard, &c., was enclosed by a very high wall. This
was the farm of Quatre Bras. Beyond it, looking obliquely to the
right, the wood (in which the battle still lingered when we arrived
last night) stretched away some distance along the roads to Nivelle
and Charleroi, which last we understood lay in front, but far out
of sight. Along the continuation of the Charleroi road, and in the
direction of Brussels, a little in rear of our right, a few cottages
scattered along it had their little gardens enclosed by banks, with
here and there an elder or some such bush growing on them; and these
were the only enclosures to be seen, all the rest being a wide extent
of corn-land without hedge or wall. On the farther side of the road,
beyond the cottages, the fields were interspersed with thickets of
underwood and a few clumps of trees, which shut in the view in that
direction. To the rear the country appeared perfectly naked and
open. To the left (I always speak with reference to the enemy whom
we fronted) the ground descended very gradually for about two miles,
where it appeared bounded by a long wood extending far away towards
Brussels. In front it descended more abruptly; and then there was a
plain about a mile in breadth extending along our front, from the
wood on the left to that on the right. The great road from Nivelle
to Namur, crossing that from Brussels to Charleroi at Quatre Bras,
ran along this plain, whilst the direction of the latter was nearly
perpendicular to our position. Beyond this plain the ground rose
again to a height somewhat superior to that on which we stood, and
another large wood extended on it from opposite the one on our left,
apparently half-way to that on the right, having the declivity
towards us laid out in fields enclosed by pretty thick hedges.
Between these two woods the opening gave us an extensive view over
the country, in the direction of Gembloux and Namur.

On the Charleroi road and in the plain was a small village (Frasnes),
with its church, just beyond which the road ascended the heights,
on the open part of which, between the road and the wood towards
the left, was the bivouac of the French army opposed to us. Its
advanced-posts were in the valley near Frasnes, and ours opposite to
them--our main body occupying the ground between Quatre Bras and the
wood on the left. A smart skirmish was going on amongst the hedges,
&c., already mentioned, and this was the firing we had heard all
the morning. Our infantry were lying about, cleaning their arms,
cooking, or amusing themselves, totally regardless of the skirmish.
This, however, from our position, was a very interesting sight to
me, for the slope of the ground enabled me to see distinctly all
the manœuvres of both parties, as on a plan. After much firing from
the edge of the wood, opposite which our riflemen occupied all the
hedges, I saw the French chasseurs suddenly make a rush forward
in all directions, whilst the fire of our people became thicker
and faster than ever. Many of the former scampered across the open
fields until they reached the nearest hedges, whilst others ran
crouching under cover of those perpendicular to their front, and the
whole succeeded in establishing themselves--thus forcing back and
gaining ground on our men. The fire then again became sharper than
ever--sometimes the French were driven back; and this alternation I
watched with great interest until summoned to Major M‘Donald, who
brought us orders for the day. From him I first learned the result
of the action of yesterday--the retreat of the Prussians, and that
we were to do so too. His directions to me were that I should follow
some corps of infantry, or something of the sort; for what followed
caused me to forget it all: “_Major Ramsay’s troop_,” he said, “_will
remain in the rear with the cavalry, to cover the retreat; but I will
not conceal from you that it falls to your turn to do this, if you
choose it_.” The Major looked rather conscience-stricken as he made
this avowal, so, to relieve him, I begged he would give the devil
his due and me mine. Accordingly all the others marched off, and as
nothing was likely to take place immediately, we amused ourselves by
looking on at what was doing. Just at this moment an amazing outcry
arose amongst the infantry at the farm, who were running towards us
in a confused mass, shouting and bellowing, jostling and pushing
each other. I made sure the enemy’s cavalry had made a dash amongst
them, especially as the fire of the skirmishers became thicker and
apparently nearer, when the thing was explained by a large pig,
squealing as if already stuck, bursting from the throng by which he
was beset in all directions. Some struck at him with axes, others
with the butts of their muskets, others stabbed at him with bayonets.
The chase would have been amusing had it not been so brutal; and I
have seldom experienced greater horror than I did on this occasion
when the poor brute, staggering from the repeated blows he received,
was at last brought to the ground by at least half-a-dozen bayonets
plunged into him at once.

All this time our retreat was going on very quietly. The corps at
Quatre Bras had retired early in the morning and been replaced by
others from the left, and this continued constantly--every corps
halting for a time on the ground near Quatre Bras until another from
the left arrived, these moving off on the great road to Brussels,
ceding the ground to the new-comers.

At first every one, exulting in the success of yesterday--the having
repulsed the enemy with a handful of men, as it were, unsupported by
cavalry and with very little artillery--anticipated, now our army
was united, nothing less than an immediate attack on the French
position. We were sadly knocked down, then, when the certainty of
our retreat became known. It was in vain we were told the retreat
was only a manœuvre of concentration; the most gloomy anticipations
pervaded every breast. About this time Sir Alexander Dickson paid me
a visit, having just arrived from New Orleans, where he commanded the
artillery, to be our Deputy-Quartermaster-General. He only stayed a
few minutes.

As the infantry corps on the plateau became fewer, the fire of the
skirmishers amongst the hedges gradually relaxed, and at length
ceased--the Rifles, &c., being withdrawn, and following the line of
retreat. At last, about noon, I found myself left with my troop,
quite alone, on the brow of the position, just by the farm of Quatre
Bras--the only troops in sight being a small picket of hussars, near
the village of Frasnes, in the plain below; a few more in our rear,
but at some little distance, amongst the houses; and a brigade of
hussars[13] far away to the left (about two miles), close to the
wood in that quarter. Thus solitary, as it were, I had ample leisure
to contemplate the scene of desolation around me, so strangely at
variance with the otherwise smiling landscape. Everywhere mementoes
of yesterday’s bloody struggle met the eye--the corn trampled down,
and the ground, particularly in the plain, plentifully besprinkled
with bodies of the slain. Just in front of the farm of Quatre Bras
there was a fearful scene of slaughter--Highlanders and cuirassiers
lying thickly strewn about; the latter appeared to have charged up
the Charleroi road, on which, and immediately bordering it, they lay
most numerously.

In communicating to me the orders of our retreat, Major M‘Donald
had reiterated that to join Lord Edward Somerset’s brigade without
delay, but still he could not tell me where this brigade was to be
found. Meantime Sir Ormsby Vandeleur’s brigade of light dragoons
having formed up in front of the houses, and supposing from this
that all the cavalry must be nigh, as one step towards finding Lord
Edward I crossed the road to the right of these dragoons, and rode
towards the part where, as before stated, the light was intercepted
by trees and bushes. On passing through these I had an uninterrupted
view of the country for miles, but not a soldier or living being was
to be seen in that direction. As I pushed on through the thickets
my horse, suddenly coming to a stand, began to snort, and showed
unequivocal symptoms of fear. I drove him on, however, but started
myself when I saw, lying under the bush, the body of a man stripped
naked. This victim of war was a youth of fair form, skin delicately
white, and face but little darker; an embryo mustache decorated the
upper lip, and his countenance, even in death, was beautiful. That he
was French I conjectured, but neither on himself nor his horse was
there a particle of clothing that could indicate to what nation he
belonged. If French, how came he here to die alone so far in the rear
of our lines? I know not why, but the rencontre with this solitary
corpse had a wonderful effect on my spirits--far different from what
I felt when gazing on the heaps that encumbered the field beyond.
Seldom have I experienced such despondency--such heart-sinking--as
when standing over this handsome form thus despoiled, neglected, and
about to become a prey to wolves and carrion crows--the darling of
some fond mother, the adored of some fair maid. His horse, stripped
like himself, lay by--they had met their fate at once. Returning
to my troop, I found Sir Augustus Frazer, who had come to order my
ammunition-waggons to the rear that the retreat might be as little
encumbered as possible, and to tell me that what ammunition was used
during the day would be supplied by my sending for it to Langeveldt,
on the road to Brussels, where that to Wavre branches from it.

Thus divested of our ammunition, it was evident that our retreat must
be a rapid one, since with only fifty rounds a-gun (the number in the
limbers), it could not be expected that we could occupy any position
longer than a few minutes. In the end, this measure had nearly led to
very disagreeable results, as will be seen anon.

It was now about one o’clock. My battery stood in position on the
brow of the declivity, with its right near the wall of the farm,
all alone, the only troops in sight being, as before mentioned, the
picket and a few scattered hussars in the direction of Frasnes, Sir
O. Vandeleur’s light dragoons two or three hundred yards in our
rear, and Sir H. Vivian’s hussars far away to the left. Still the
French army made no demonstration of an advance. This inactivity was
unaccountable. Lord Uxbridge and an aide-de-camp came to the front
of my battery, and, dismounting, seated himself on the ground; so
did I and the aide-de-camp. His lordship with his glass was watching
the French position; and we were all three wondering at their want
of observation and inactivity, which had not only permitted our
infantry to retire unmolested, but also still retained them in
their bivouac. “It will not be long now before they are on us,”
said the aide-de-camp, “for they always dine before they move; and
those smokes seem to indicate that they are cooking now.” He was
right; for not long afterwards another aide-de-camp, scouring along
the valley, came to report that a heavy column of cavalry[14] was
advancing through the opening between the woods to the left from the
direction of Gembloux. At the same moment we saw them distinctly;
and Lord Uxbridge, having reconnoitered them a moment through his
glass, started up, exclaiming, in a joyful tone, “By the Lord, they
are Prussians!” jumped on his horse, and, followed by the two aides,
dashed off like a whirlwind to meet them. For a moment I stood
looking after them as they swept down the slope, and could not help
wondering how the Prussians came there. I was, however, not left long
in my perplexity, for, turning my eyes towards the French position,
I saw their whole army descending from it in three or four dark
masses, whilst their advanced cavalry picket was already skirmishing
with and driving back our hussars. The truth instantly flashed on my
mind, and I became exceedingly uneasy for the safety of Lord Uxbridge
and his companions, now far advanced on their way down the valley,
and likely to be irretrievably cut off. My situation now appeared
somewhat awkward: left without orders and entirely alone on the brow
of our position--the hussar pickets galloping in and hurrying past
as fast as they could--the whole French army advancing, and already
at no great distance. In this dilemma, I determined to retire across
the little dip that separated me from Sir O. Vandeleur, and take up
a position in front of his squadrons, whence, after giving a round
to the French advance as soon as they stood on our present ground,
I thought I could retire in sufficient time through his intervals
to leave the ground clear for him to charge. This movement was
immediately executed; but the guns were scarcely unlimbered ere Sir
Ormsby came furiously up, exclaiming, “What are you doing here, sir?
You encumber my front, and we shall not be able to charge. Take your
guns away, sir; instantly, I say--take them away!” It was in vain
that I endeavoured to explain my intentions, and that our fire would
allow his charge to be made with more effect. “No, no; take them out
of my way, sir!” was all the answer I could get; and, accordingly,
I was preparing to obey, when up came Lord Uxbridge, and the scene
changed in a twinkling. “Captain Mercer, are you loaded?” “Yes, my
lord.” “Then give them a round as they rise the hill, and retire
as quickly as possible.” “Light dragoons, threes right; at a trot,
march!” and then some orders to Sir Ormsby, of whom I saw no more
that day. “They are just coming up the hill,” said Lord Uxbridge.
“Let them get well up before you fire. Do you think you can retire
quick enough afterwards?” “I am sure of it, my lord.” “Very well,
then, keep a good look-out, and point your guns well.” I had often
longed to see Napoleon, that mighty man of war--that astonishing
genius who had filled the world with his renown. Now I saw him, and
there was a degree of sublimity in the interview rarely equalled.
The sky had become overcast since the morning, and at this moment
presented a most extraordinary appearance. Large isolated masses
of thundercloud, of the deepest, almost inky black, their lower
edges hard and strongly defined, lagging down, as if momentarily
about to burst, hung suspended over us, involving our position and
everything on it in deep and gloomy obscurity; whilst the distant
hill lately occupied by the French army still lay bathed in brilliant
sunshine. Lord Uxbridge was yet speaking, when a single horseman,[15]
immediately followed by several others, mounted the plateau I had
left at a gallop, their dark figures thrown forward in strong relief
from the illuminated distance, making them appear much nearer to us
than they really were. For an instant they pulled up and regarded us,
when several squadrons, coming rapidly on the plateau, Lord Uxbridge
cried out, “Fire!--fire!” and, giving them a general discharge, we
quickly limbered up to retire, as they dashed forward supported by
some horse-artillery guns, which opened upon us ere we could complete
the manœuvre, but without much effect, for the only one touched was
the servant of Major Whinyates, who was wounded in the leg by the
splinter of a howitzer shell.

It was now for the first time that I discovered the Major and his
rocket-troop, who, annoyed at my having the rear, had disobeyed
the order to retreat, and remained somewhere in the neighbourhood
until this moment, hoping to share whatever might be going on. The
first gun that was fired seemed to burst the clouds overhead, for
its report was instantly followed by an awful clap of thunder, and
lightning that almost blinded us, whilst the rain came down as if
a water-spout had broken over us. The sublimity of the scene was
inconceivable. Flash succeeded flash, and the peals of thunder were
long and tremendous; whilst, as if in mockery of the elements, the
French guns still sent forth their feebler glare and now scarcely
audible reports--their cavalry dashing on at a headlong pace, adding
their shouts to the uproar. We galloped for our lives through the
storm, striving to gain the enclosures about the houses of the
hamlets, Lord Uxbridge urging us on, crying, “Make haste!--make
haste! for God’s sake, gallop, or you will be taken!” We did make
haste, and succeeded in getting amongst the houses and gardens, but
with the French advance close on our heels. Here, however, observing
the chaussée full of hussars, they pulled up. Had they continued
their charge we were gone, for these hussars were scattered about the
road in the utmost confusion, some in little squads, others singly,
and, moreover, so crowded together that we had no room whatever to
act with any effect--either they or us.

Meantime the enemy’s detachments began to envelop the gardens,
which Lord Uxbridge observing, called to me, “Here follow me with
two of your guns,” and immediately himself led the way into one
of the narrow lanes between the gardens. What he intended doing,
God knows, but I obeyed. The lane was very little broader than our
carriages--there was not room for a horse to have passed them! The
distance from the chaussée to the end of the lane, where it debouched
on the open fields, could scarcely have been above one or two hundred
yards at most. His lordship and I were in front, the guns and
mounted detachments following. What he meant to do I was at a loss
to conceive: we could hardly come to action in the lane; to enter
on the open was certain destruction. Thus we had arrived at about
fifty yards from its termination when a body of chasseurs or hussars
appeared there as if waiting for us. These we might have seen from
the first, for nothing but a few elder bushes intercepted the view
from the chaussée. The whole transaction appears to me so wild and
confused that at times I can hardly believe it to have been more
than a confused dream--yet true it was;--the general-in-chief of the
cavalry exposing himself amongst the skirmishers of his rear-guard,
and literally doing the duty of a cornet! “By God! we are all
prisoners” (or some such words), exclaimed Lord Uxbridge, dashing his
horse at one of the garden-banks, which he cleared, and away he went,
leaving us to get out of the scrape as best we could. There was no
time for hesitation--one manœuvre alone could extricate us if allowed
time, and it I ordered. “Reverse by unlimbering” was the order. To
do this the gun was to be unlimbered, then turned round, and one
wheel run up the bank, which just left space for the limber to pass
it. The gun is then limbered up again and ready to move to the rear.
The execution, however, was not easy, for the very reversing of the
limber itself in so narrow a lane, with a team of eight horses, was
sufficiently difficult, and required first-rate driving. Nothing
could exceed the coolness and activity of our men; the thing was
done quickly and well, and we returned to the chaussée without let or
hindrance. How we were permitted to do so, I am at a loss to imagine;
for although I gave the order to reverse, I certainly never expected
to have seen it executed. Meantime my own situation was anything but
a pleasant one, as I sat with my back to the gentlemen at the end of
the lane, whose interference I momentarily expected, casting an eye
from time to time over my shoulder to ascertain whether they still
kept their position. There they sat motionless, and although thankful
for their inactivity, I could not but wonder at their stupidity. It
seemed, however, all of a piece that day--all blunder and confusion;
and this last I found pretty considerable on regaining the chaussée.
His lordship we found collecting the scattered hussars together
into a squadron for our rescue, for which purpose it was he had so
unceremoniously left us. Heavy as the rain was and thick the weather,
yet the French could not but have seen the confusion we were in, as
they had closed up to the entrance of the enclosure; and yet they did
not at once take advantage of it. Things could not remain long in
this state. A heavy column of cavalry approached us by the chaussée,
whilst another, skirting the enclosures, appeared pushing forward to
cut us off. Retreat now became imperative. The order was given, and
away we went, helter-skelter--guns, gun-detachments, and hussars all
mixed _pêle-mêle_, going like mad, and covering each other with mud,
to be washed off by the rain, which, before sufficiently heavy, now
came down again as it had done at first in splashes instead of drops,
soaking us anew to the skin, and, what was worse, extinguishing every
slow-match in the brigade. The obscurity caused by the splashing
of the rain was such, that at one period I could not distinguish
objects more than a few yards distant. Of course we lost sight of our
pursuers altogether, and the shouts and halloos, and even laughter,
they had at first sent forth were either silenced or drowned in the
uproar of the elements and the noise of our too rapid retreat; for
in addition to everything else the crashing and rattling of the
thunder were most awful, and the glare of the lightning blinding.
In this state we gained the bridge of Genappe at the moment when
the thundercloud, having passed over, left us in comparative fine
weather, although still raining heavily.

The town of Genappe stands on the slope of a hill rising immediately
from the little verdant valley through which the Lys flows--here
little better than a brook. Arrived at the bridge, we slackened our
pace, and ascended leisurely the narrow winding street, in which
not a living soul was visible. The shutters were all closed, and
stream of water pouring from the roofs formed a perfect torrent of
the gutter running down the middle of it. This solitude was rather a
disappointment, for I had hoped here to have got fire to relight our
slow-match.

For the last mile or so we had neither seen nor heard anything of
our lively French friends, and now silently wound our way up the
deserted street, nothing disturbing its death-like stillness save the
iron sound of horses’ feet, the rumbling of the carriages, and the
splashing of water as it fell from the eaves,--all this was stillness
compared with the hurly-burly and din from which we had just emerged.

On gaining the high ground beyond the town, we suddenly came in sight
of the main body of our cavalry drawn up across the chaussée in two
lines, and extending away far to the right and left of it.

It would have been an imposing spectacle at any time, but just now
appeared to me magnificent and I hailed it with complacency, for
here I thought our fox-chase must end. “Those superb Life Guards
and Blues will soon teach our pursuers a little modesty.” Such
fellows!--surely nothing can withstand them. Scarcely had these
thoughts passed through my mind ere an order from his lordship
recalled us to the rear. On debouching from the town, seeing nothing
in the country right and left of us, and fearful of impeding the
retreat, whilst our hussars retired skirmishing through the street
(the French having again come up), we had continued onward to
gain the position occupied by our heavy cavalry, from which we
were still separated by a small dip of the ground. We returned
then to the end of the town, where the flight of shot and shells
over us (the road was here sunk between two high banks) gave very
intelligible information as to the reason of our recall. The enemy’s
horse-artillery, having taken up a position in the meadows near the
bridge, were annoying our dragoons as they debouched from the town.
The ground was heavy from the rain, and very steep, so that it was
only by great exertion that we succeeded at last in getting our guns
into the adjoining field. The moment we appeared the French battery
bestowed on us its undivided attention, which we quickly acknowledged
by an uncommonly well-directed fire of spherical case. Whilst so
employed, Major M‘Donald came up and put me through a regular
catechism as to length of fuze, whether out of bag A or B, &c. &c.
Although much vexed at such a schooling just now, yet the Major
appeared so seriously in earnest that I could not but be amused;
however, to convince him we knew what we were about, I directed his
attention to our excellent practice, so superior to that of our
antagonist, who was sending all his shot far over our heads. The
French seemed pretty well convinced of this too, for after standing
a few rounds they quitted the field, and left us again without
occupation. The Major vanishing at the same time, I sent my guns,
&c., to the rear, and set off to join Lord Uxbridge, who was still
fighting in the street. Our ammunition was expended, the waggons
having been taken away by Sir Augustus Frazer at Quatre Bras.

On regaining my troop, I found Major M‘Donald and the rockets with
it. They were in position on a gentle elevation, on which likewise
were formed the lines of cavalry extending across the chaussée.
Immediately on our left, encased in the hollow road, the Blues were
formed in close column of half-squadrons, and it was not long ere
Lord Uxbridge, with those he had retained at Genappe, came sweeping
over the hill and joined us. They were closely followed by the
French light cavalry, who, descending into the hollow, commenced
a sharp skirmish with our advanced-posts. Soon squadron after
squadron appeared on the hill we had passed, and took up their
positions, forming a long line parallel to ours, whilst a battery of
horse-artillery, forming across the chaussée, just on the brow of
the declivity, opened its fire on us, though without much effect. To
this we responded, though very slowly, having no more ammunition than
what remained in our limbers. In order to amuse the enemy and our
own cavalry, as well as to prevent the former noticing the slackness
of our fire, I proposed to Major M‘Donald making use of the rockets,
which had hitherto done nothing. There was a little hesitation
about this, and one of the officers (Strangways) whispered me, “No,
no--it’s too far!” This I immediately told the Major, proposing as a
remedy that they should go closer. Still there was demur; but at last
my proposition was agreed to, and down they marched into the thick of
the skirmishers in the bottom. Of course, having proposed the measure
myself, I could do no less than accompany them. Whilst they prepared
their machinery, I had time to notice what was going on to the right
and left of us. Two double lines of skirmishers extended all along
the bottom--the foremost of each line were within a few yards of each
other--constantly in motion, riding backwards and forwards, firing
their carbines or pistols, and then reloading, still on the move.
This fire seemed to me more dangerous for those on the hills above
than for us below; for all, both French and English, generally stuck
out their carbines or pistols as they continued to move backwards and
forwards, and discharged them without taking any particular aim, and
mostly in the air. I did not see a man fall on either side; the thing
appeared quite ridiculous; and but for hearing the bullets whizzing
overhead, one might have fancied it no more than a sham-fight.

Meanwhile the rocketeers had placed a little iron triangle in the
road with a rocket lying on it. The order to fire is given--portfire
applied--the fidgety missile begins to sputter out sparks and wriggle
its tail for a second or so, and then darts forth straight up the
chaussée. A gun stands right in its way, between the wheels of which
the shell in the head of the rocket bursts, the gunners fall right
and left, and, those of the other guns taking to their heels, the
battery is deserted in an instant. Strange; but so it was. I saw
them run, and for some minutes afterwards I saw the guns standing
mute and unmanned, whilst our rocketeers kept shooting off rockets,
none of which ever followed the course of the first; most of them, on
arriving about the middle of the ascent, took a vertical direction,
whilst some actually turned back upon ourselves--and one of these,
following me like a squib until its shell exploded, actually put
me in more danger than all the fire of the enemy throughout the
day. Meanwhile the French artillerymen, seeing how the land lay,
returned to their guns and opened a fire of case-shot on us, but
without effect, for we retreated to our ridge without the loss of a
man, or even any wounded, though the range could not have been above
200 yards. As we had overtaken the rear of our infantry, it became
necessary to make a stand here to enable them to gain ground. Major
M‘Donald therefore sent me in pursuit of my ammunition-waggons,
since all in our limbers was expended. Having before sent for these,
we calculated that they could not now be very far off. In going to
the rear I passed along the top of the bank, under which, as I have
said, the Blues were encased in the hollow road. Shot and shells were
flying pretty thickly about just then, and, sometimes striking the
top of the bank, would send down a shower of mud and clods upon them.

The ammunition-waggons I found coming up, and was returning with
them when I met my whole troop again retiring by the road, whilst
the cavalry did so by alternate regiments across the fields. The
ground offering no feature for another stand, we continued thus along
the road. The infantry had made so little progress that we again
overtook the rear of their column, composed of Brunswickers--some of
those same boys I used to see practising at Schäpdale in my rides to
Brussels. These poor lads were pushing on at a great rate. As soon
as their rear divisions heard the sound of our horses’ feet, without
once looking behind them, they began to crowd and press on those in
front, until at last, hearing us close up to them, and finding it
impossible to push forward in the road, many of them broke off into
the fields; and such was their panic that, in order to run lighter,
away went arms and knapsacks in all directions, and a general race
ensued, the whole corps being in the most horrid confusion. It was
to no purpose that I exerted my little stock of German to make them
understand we were their English friends--a frightened glance and
away, was all the effect of my interference, which drove many of
them off. We, however, still kept on our way, and soon after passed
a few houses by the roadside, which I afterwards found was La Belle
Alliance. Hence we crossed another valley, and on rising the opposite
hill I found a capital position on the top of an old gravel-pit,
which I occupied without loss of time. Behind the ground on which
my guns were formed was a long hedge[16] (a _rara avis_ in this
country), which prevented our seeing anything beyond; and as no
troops were in sight except those following us across the valley, we
had then no idea that we had arrived in the position where our whole
army was assembled, nor that we then stood upon ground which, ere
to-morrow’s sun were set, would for ever be celebrated throughout all
generations!

We did not long remain idle, for the guns were scarcely loaded ere
the rear of our cavalry came crowding upon the infantry corps we had
passed, and which were then only crossing the valley, the French
advance skirmishing with these, whilst their squadrons occupied the
heights. We waited a little until some of their larger masses were
assembled, and then opened our fire with a range across the valley of
about 1200 yards. The echo of our first gun had not ceased, when, to
my astonishment, a heavy cannonade, commencing in a most startling
manner from behind our hedge, rolled along the rising-ground, on part
of which we were posted. The truth now flashed on me; we had rejoined
the army, and it is impossible to describe the pleasing sense of
security I felt at having now the support of something more stanch
than cavalry.

The French now brought up battery after battery, and a tremendous
cannonading was kept up by both sides for some time. The effect was
grand and exciting. Our position was a happy one, for all their shot
which grazed short, came and struck in the perpendicular bank of our
gravel-pit--and only one struck amongst us, breaking the traversing
handspike at one of the guns, but neither injuring man nor horse.
Our fire was principally directed against their masses as we could
see them, which was not always the case from the smoke that, for
want of wind, hung over them; then against their smaller parties
that had advanced into the valley to skirmish with the rear-guard
of our cavalry. Here for the second and last time I saw Napoleon,
though infinitely more distant than in the morning. Some of my
non-commissioned officers pointed their guns at the numerous cortège
accompanying him as they stood near the road by Belle Alliance; and
one, pointed by old Quartermaster Hall, fell in the midst of them. At
the moment we saw some little confusion amongst the group, but it did
not hinder them from continuing the reconnaissance.

Whilst we were thus engaged, a man of no very prepossessing
appearance came rambling amongst our guns, and entered into
conversation with me on the occurrences of the day. He was dressed in
a shabby old drab greatcoat and a rusty round hat. I took him at the
time for some amateur from Brussels (of whom we had heard there were
several hovering about), and thinking many of his questions rather
impertinent, was somewhat short in answering him, and he soon left
us. How great was my astonishment on learning soon after that this
was Sir Thomas Picton! The enemy, finding us obstinate in maintaining
our position, soon slackened, and then ceased firing altogether; and
we were immediately ordered to do the same, and establish ourselves
in bivouac for the night. This we proceeded to obey as a most welcome
order, and retiring from our position down the hill, came to a
large farm, where, breaking through a quickset hedge, we formed
our park in the adjoining orchard, preferring its green turf to the
plashy, muddy fields around, that morning covered with fine crops of
wheat, now little better than sloughs. We were not long, however, in
discovering that it was only exchanging the frying-pan for the fire,
since our smiling turf was nearly ankle-deep in water, the orchard
lying low and hollow, somewhat below the level of the road. But it
was already growing dark, consequently too late to hunt out another,
so we were obliged to put up with it.

Thoroughly wet--cloaks, blankets, and all--comfort was out of the
question, so we prepared to make the best of it.

Our first care was of course the horses, and these we had ample means
of providing for, since, in addition to what corn we had left, one
of our men had picked up and brought forward on an ammunition-waggon
a large sack full, which he found in the road near Genappe. Thus
they, at least, had plenty to eat, and having been so well drenched
all day, were not much in need of water. For ourselves we had
nothing!--absolutely nothing! and looked forward to rest alone to
restore our exhausted strength. Rather a bore going supperless to
bed after such a day, yet was there no help for it.

But our poor animals were not all of them destined to repose, and
much as they had undergone during the last six-and-thirty hours,
some of them were yet obliged to pass the night on the road, and
in harness. Completing our limbers with ammunition from two of
the ammunition-waggons, a non-commissioned officer was despatched
with these, as soon as the horses had been fed, to Langeveldt near
Brussels, where Sir Augustus Frazer had told me in the morning we
should find a depôt from whence to supply what had been expended
during the day.

These cared for, came the care of ourselves. Our gunners, &c.,
soon stowed themselves away beneath the carriages, using the
painted covers as additional shelter against the rain, which now
set in again as heavy as ever. We set up a small tent, into which
(after vain attempts at procuring food or lodgings in the farm or
its outbuildings, all of which were crammed to suffocation with
officers and soldiers of all arms and nations) we crept, and rolling
ourselves in our wet blankets, huddled close together, in hope,
wet as we were, and wet as the ground was, of keeping each other
warm. I know not how my bed-fellows got on, as we all lay for a
long while perfectly still and silent--the old Peninsular hands
disdaining to complain before their Johnny Newcome comrades, and
these fearing to do so lest they should provoke some such remarks,
as “Lord have mercy on your poor tender carcass! what would such
as you have done in the Pyrenees?” or “Oho, my boy! this is but
child’s play to what _we_ saw in Spain.” So all who did not sleep (I
believe the majority) pretended to do so, and bore their suffering
with admirable heroism. For my part, I once or twice, from sheer
fatigue, got into something like a doze; yet it would not do. There
was no possibility of sleeping, for besides being already so wet,
the tent proved no shelter, the water pouring through the canvas in
streams; so up I got, and, to my infinite joy, found that some of
the men had managed to make a couple of fires, round which they were
sitting smoking their short pipes in something like comfort. The hint
was a good one, and at that moment my second captain joining me, we
borrowed from them a few sticks, and choosing the best spot under
the hedge, proceeded to make a fire for ourselves. In a short time
we succeeded in raising a cheerful blaze, which materially bettered
our situation. My companion had an umbrella (which, by the way, had
afforded some merriment to our people on the march); this we planted
against the sloping bank of the hedge, and seating ourselves under
it, he on one side of the stick, me on the other, we lighted cigars
and became--comfortable. Dear weed! what comfort, what consolation
dost thou not impart to the wretched!--with thee a hovel becomes a
palace. What a stock of patience is there not enveloped in one of
thy brown leaves! And thus we sat enjoying ourselves, puffing forth
into the damp night air streams of fragrant smoke, being able now
deliberately to converse on what had been, and probably would be. All
this time a most infernal clatter of musketry was going on, which,
but for the many quiet dark figures seated round the innumerable
fires all along the position, might have been construed into a
night-attack. But as these gentlemen were between us and the enemy,
we felt assured of timely warning, and ere long learned that all this
proceeded as before from the infantry discharging and cleaning their
pieces. Our conversation naturally turned on our present position;
and after discussing all the pros. and cons., we made up our minds to
recommence the retreat with to-morrow’s sun; but when that retreat
was to terminate, baffled all our powers of conjecture.

Whilst so employed, a rustling in the hedge behind attracted our
attention, and in a few minutes a poor fellow belonging to some
Hanoverian regiment, wet through like everybody else, and shivering
with cold, made his appearance, and modestly begged permission to
remain a short time and warm himself by our fire. He had somehow or
other wandered from his colours, and had passed the greater part
of the night searching for them, but in vain. At first he appeared
quite exhausted, but the warmth reinvigorating him, he pulled out his
pipe and began to smoke. Having finished his modicum, and carefully
disposed of the ashes, he rose from his wet seat to renew his search,
hoping to find his corps before daylight, he said, lest it should be
engaged. Many thanks he offered for our hospitality; but what was
our surprise when, after fumbling in his havresack for some time,
he pulled out a poor half-starved chicken, presented it to us, and
marched off. This was a god-send, in good truth, to people famished
as we were; so calling for a camp-kettle, our prize was on the fire
in a twinkling. Our comrades in the tent did not sleep so soundly but
that they heard what was going on, and the kettle was hardly on the
fire ere my gentlemen were assembled round it, a wet and shivering
group, but all eager to partake of our good fortune--and so eager
that, after various betrayals of impatience, the miserable chicken
was at last snatched from the kettle ere it was half-boiled, pulled
to pieces, and speedily devoured. I got a leg for my share, but it
was not one mouthful, and this was the only food I tasted since the
night before.




CHAPTER XIII.


_June 18th._--Memorable day! Some time before daybreak the bombardier
who had been despatched to Langeveldt returned with a supply of
ammunition. He reported that he had been much impeded by the
confusion on the road, which was everywhere crowded with waggons, &c.
Many he had seen overturned, and many plundered, or being plundered;
but his account by no means justified those who stated the road to be
blocked up in such a manner as to be impassable. Indeed, considering
all things, he had performed his journey in sufficiently reasonable
time.

With the providence of an old soldier, he had picked up and brought
on a considerable quantity of beef, biscuit, and oatmeal, of which
there was abundance scattered about everywhere. Casks of rum,
&c., there were, and having broached one of these--he and his
drivers--every one filled his canteen--a most considerate act, and
one for which the whole troop was sincerely thankful. Nor must I omit
to remark that, amidst such temptations, his men had behaved with the
most perfect regularity, and returned to us _quite sober_!

The rum was divided on the spot; and surely if ardent spirits
are ever beneficial, it must be to men situated as ours were; it
therefore came most providentially. The oatmeal was converted
speedily into stirabout, and afforded our people a hearty meal,
after which all hands set to work to prepare the beef, make soup,
&c. Unfortunately, we preferred waiting for this, and passed
the stirabout, by which piece of folly we were doomed to a very
protracted fast, as will be seen. Whilst our soup was cooking, it
being now broad daylight, I mounted my horse to reconnoitre our
situation. During the night another troop (I think Major Ramsay’s)
had established itself in our orchard, and just outside the hedge I
found Major Bean’s, which had also arrived during the night, direct
from England. Ascending from the farm towards the ground we had left
yesterday evening, the face of the slope, as far as I could see,
to the right and left, was covered with troops _en bivouac_--here,
I think, principally cavalry. Of these some were cleaning their
arms, some cooking, some sitting round fires smoking, and a few,
generally officers, walking about, or standing in groups conversing.
Many of the latter eagerly inquired where I was going, and appeared
very anxious for intelligence, all expecting nothing less than
to recommence our retreat. I continued on to the position we had
occupied last, and thence clearly saw the French army on the opposite
hill, where everything appeared perfectly quiet--people moving
about individually, and no formation whatever. Their advanced-posts
and vedettes in the valley, just beyond La Haye Sainte, were also
quiet. Having satisfied my curiosity, I returned the way I came,
communicating my observations to the many eager inquirers I met with.
Various were the speculations in consequence. Some thought the French
were afraid to attack us, others that they would do so soon, others
that the Duke would not wait for it, others that he would, as he
certainly would not allow them to go to Brussels; and so they went on
speculating, whilst I returned to my people. Here, finding the mess
not yet ready, and nothing to be done, I strolled into the garden
of the farm, where several Life Guardsmen were very busy digging
potatoes--a fortunate discovery, which I determined to profit by.
Therefore calling up some of my men, to work we went without loss of
time.

Whilst thus employed, I noticed a very heavy firing going on in
front, but this did not make us quit our work. Shortly after, to my
great astonishment, I observed that all the bivouacs on the hillside
were deserted, and that even Ramsay’s troop had left the orchard
without my being aware of it, and my own was left quite alone, not a
soul being visible from where I stood in any direction, the ground
they had quitted presenting one unbroken muddy solitude. The firing
became heavier and heavier. Alarmed at being thus left alone, when
it was evident something serious was going on, I hastened back and
ordered the horses to be put to immediately.

Away went our mess untasted. One of the servants was desired to hang
the kettle with its contents under an ammunition-waggon. The stupid
fellow hung the kettle as desired, but first emptied it. Without
orders, and all alone, the battle (for now there was no mistaking it)
going on at the other side of the hill, I remained for a few minutes
undecided what to do. It appeared to me we had been forgotten.
All, except only ourselves, were evidently engaged; and labouring
under this delusion, I thought we had better get into the affair
at once. As soon, therefore, as the troop was ready, I led them up
the hill on the highroad, hoping to meet some one who could give me
directions what to do. We had not proceeded a hundred yards, when
an artillery officer came furiously galloping down towards us. It
was Major M‘Lloyd, in a dreadful state of agitation--such, indeed,
that he could hardly answer my questions. I learned, however, that
the battle was very serious and bloody. Their first attack had been
on that part of our position where his battery stood; but now the
principal efforts were making against our right. All this was told
in so hurried and anxious a manner, that one could hardly understand
him. “But where are you going?” he added. I told him my plan. “Have
you no orders?” “None whatever; I have not seen a soul.” “Then, for
God’s sake, come and assist me, or I shall be ruined. My brigade is
cut to pieces, ammunition expended, and, unless reinforced, we shall
be destroyed.” He was dreadfully agitated, and when I took his hand
and promised to be with him directly, seemed transported with joy;
so, bidding me make haste, he darted up the hill again, and went
to receive that death-stroke which, ere long, was to terminate his
earthly career. I trust before that termination he heard the reason
why I never fulfilled that promise; for weeks elapsed ere he died,
no doubt--otherwise he must have set me down for a base poltroon. My
destiny led me elsewhere. My tutelary spirit was at hand: the eternal
Major M‘Donald made his appearance, and, giving me a sharp reprimand
for having quitted my bivouac, desired me instantly to return to the
foot of the hill, and there wait for orders. Sulkily and slowly we
descended, and forming in line on the ground opposite the farm of
Mont St Jean, with our left to the road, I dismounted the men that
they might be a little less liable to be hit by shot and shells
which, coming over the hill, were continually plunging into the muddy
soil all around us. This was a peculiarly dismal situation--without
honour or glory, to be knocked on the head in such a solitude, for
not a living being was in sight.

It was while thus standing idle that a fine tall upright old
gentleman, in plain clothes, followed by two young ones, came across
our front at a gallop from the Brussels road, and continued on
towards where we supposed the right of our army to be. I certainly
stared at seeing three unarmed civilians pressing forward into so
hot a fight. These were the Duke of Richmond and his two sons.
How long we had been in this position, I know not, when at length
we were relieved from it by our adjutant (Lieutenant Bell), who
brought orders for our removal to the right of the second line.
Moving, therefore, to our right, along the hollow, we soon began a
very gentle ascent, and at the same time became aware of several
corps of infantry, which had not been very far from us, but remained
invisible, as they were all lying down. Although in this move we may
be said to have been always under a heavy fire, from the number of
missiles flying over us, yet were we still so fortunate as to arrive
in our new position without losing man or horse. In point of seeing,
our situation was much improved; but for danger and inactivity, it
was much worse, since we were now fired directly at, and positively
ordered not to return the compliment--the object in bringing us
here being to watch a most formidable-looking line of lancers drawn
up opposite to us, and threatening the right flank of our army. A
scientific relation of this great struggle, on which the fate of
Europe hinged, I pretend not to write. I write neither history, nor
‘Mémoires pour servir à l’Histoire,’ &c. &c., but only pure simple
gossip for my own amusement--just what happened to me and mine, and
what I _did_ see happen to others about me. Depend upon it, he who
pretends to give a general account of a great battle from his own
observation deceives you--believe him not. He can see no further
(that is, if he be personally engaged in it) than the length of his
nose; and how is he to tell what is passing two or three miles off,
with hills and trees and buildings intervening, and all enveloped in
smoke? Busaco might have been tolerably described, but there are no
Busacos in the Pays Bas. The back of the principal ridge on which our
army was posted descended by a pretty regular slope in the direction
of Waterloo, and but just in rear of its right another shorter and
lower ridge ran a little way almost parallel to it. The highroad
to Nivelle passed along the hollow between the two. Both ridges
terminated in a ravine that enclosed our right flank, running down
from the Château de Hougoumont (although it be pretended now that the
name is “Goumont,” I persist in the orthography which is found in all
the old maps of this department) in the direction of Merke Braine; in
short, a contracted continuation of the greater valley lying between
the two armies and nearly at right angles to it.

The sides of this ravine (much steeper than any other ground near),
as far as I can recollect, were partially covered with bushes; and,
from the summit of the one opposite to us, the ground ascended by a
very gradual slope for about 800 or 1000 yards; and there, on what
appeared as the height of the land, there were several small clumps
of wood. This slope itself was still covered with fine crops of
standing corn. The crest was occupied by the long line of lancers
already spoken of, whose movements I was ordered to watch, but on
no account to interfere with, unless they attempted to pass the
ravine.[17] Such was our front view.

To the right we looked over a fine open country, covered with crops
and interspersed with thickets or small woods. There all was peaceful
and smiling, not a living soul being in sight. To our left, the main
ridge terminated rather abruptly just over Hougoumont, the back of
it towards us being broken ground, with a few old trees on it just
where the Nivelle road descended between high banks into the ravine.
Thus we were formed _en potence_ with the 1st line, from which we
(my battery) were separated by some hundred yards. In our rear the
14th Regiment of infantry (in square, I think) lay on the ground. In
our front were some light dragoons of the German Legion, who from
time to time detached small parties across the ravine. These pushed
cautiously up the slope towards the line of lancers to reconnoitre.
The corn, down to the edge of the ravine nearer the Nivelle road
and beyond it, was full of French riflemen; and these were warmly
attacked by others[18] from our side of the ravine, whom we saw
crossing and gradually working their way up through the high corn,
the French as gradually retiring. On the right of the lancers, two
or three batteries kept up a continued fire at our position; but
their shot, which could have been only 4-pounders, fell short--many
not even reaching across the ravine. Some, however, did reach their
destination; and we were particularly plagued by their howitzer
shells with long fuses, which were continually falling about us, and
lay spitting and sputtering several seconds before they exploded, to
the no small annoyance of man and horse. Still, however, nobody was
hurt; but a round-shot, striking the ammunition-boxes on the body
of one of our waggons, penetrated through both and lodged in the
back of the rear one, with nearly half its surface to be seen from
without--a singular circumstance! In addition to this front fire,
we were exposed to another on our left flank--the shot that passed
over the main ridge terminating their career with us. Having little
to occupy us here, we had ample leisure to observe what was passing
there. We could see some corps at the end near us in squares--dark
masses, having guns between them, relieved from a background of grey
smoke, which seemed to fill the valley beyond, and rose high in the
air above the hill. Every now and then torrents of French cavalry
of all arms came sweeping over the ridge, as if carrying all before
them. But, after their passage, the squares were still to be seen
in the same places; and these gentry, who we feared would next fall
on us, would evaporate, nobody could well say how. The firing still
increased in intensity, so that we were at a loss to conjecture what
all this could mean.

About this time, being impatient of standing idle, and annoyed by
the batteries on the Nivelle road, I ventured to commit a folly, for
which I should have paid dearly had our Duke chanced to be in our
part of the field. I ventured to disobey orders, and open a slow
deliberate fire at the battery, thinking with my 9-pounders soon to
silence his 4-pounders. My astonishment was great, however, when our
very first gun was responded to by at least half-a-dozen gentlemen
of very superior calibre, whose presence I had not even suspected,
and whose superiority we immediately recognised by their rushing
noise and long reach, for they flew far beyond us. I instantly saw my
folly, and ceased firing, and they did the same--the 4-pounders alone
continuing the cannonade as before. But this was not all. The first
man of my troop touched was by one of these confounded long shot. I
shall never forget the scream the poor lad gave when struck. It was
one of the last they fired, and shattered his left arm to pieces as
he stood between the waggons. That scream went to my very soul, for
I accused myself as having caused his misfortune. I was, however,
obliged to conceal my emotion from the men, who had turned to look at
him; so, bidding them “stand to their front,” I continued my walk up
and down, whilst Hitchins ran to his assistance.

Amidst such stirring scenes, emotions of this kind are but of short
duration; what occurred immediately afterwards completely banished
Gunner Hunt from my recollection. As a counterbalance to this
tragical event, our firing produced one so comic as to excite all
our risibility. Two or three officers had lounged up to our guns to
see the effect. One of them was a medico, and _he_ (a shower having
just come on) carried an umbrella overhead. No sooner did the heavy
answers begin to arrive amongst us than these gentlemen, fancying
they should be safer with their own corps, although only a few yards
in the rear, scampered off in double-quick, doctor and all, he still
carrying his umbrella aloft. Scarcely, however, had he made two paces
when a shot, as he thought, passing rather too close, down he dropped
on his hands and knees--or, I should rather say, hand and knees, for
the one was employed in holding the silken cover most pertinaciously
over him--and away he scrambled like a great baboon, his head turned
fearfully over his shoulder, as if watching the coming shot, whilst
our fellows made the field resound with their shouts and laughter.

I think I have already mentioned that it was not until some days
afterwards that I was able to resume my regular journal, consequently
that everything relative to these three days is written from memory.
In trying to recollect scenes of this nature, some little confusion
is inevitable; and here I confess myself somewhat puzzled to
account for certain facts of which I am positive. For instance, I
remember perfectly Captain Bolton’s brigade of 9-pounders being
stationed to the left of us, somewhat in advance, and facing as
we did, consequently not far from the Nivelle road. Bolton came
and conversed with me some time, and was called hastily away by
his battery commencing a heavy fire. Query--Who, and what, was he
firing at? That he was himself under a heavy fire there is equally
no doubt, for whilst we were not losing a man, we saw many, both of
his men and horses, fall, and but a few minutes after leaving me,
he was killed himself--this is a puzzle. I have no recollection of
any troops attempting to cross the ravine, and yet his fire was in
that direction, and I think must have been toward the Nivelle road.
A distressing circumstance connected with this (shall I confess it?)
made even more impression on my spirits than the misfortune of Gunner
Hunt. Bolton’s people had not been long engaged when we saw the men
of the gun next to us unharness one of the horses and chase it away,
wounded, I supposed; yet the beast stood and moved with firmness,
going from one carriage to the other, whence I noticed he was always
eagerly driven away. At last two or three gunners drove him before
them to a considerable distance, and then returned to their guns.
I took little notice of this at the time, and was surprised by an
exclamation of horror from some of my people in the rear. A sickening
sensation came over me, mixed with a deep feeling of pity, when
within a few paces of me stood the poor horse in question, side by
side with the leaders of one of our ammunition-waggons, against which
he pressed his panting sides, as though eager to identify himself
as of their society--the driver, with horror depicted on every
feature, endeavouring by words and gestures (for the kind-hearted
lad could not strike) to drive from him so hideous a spectacle.
A cannon-shot had completely carried away the lower part of the
animal’s head, immediately below the eyes. Still he lived, and seemed
fully conscious of all around, whilst his full, clear eye seemed
to implore us not to chase him from his companions. I ordered the
farrier (Price) to put him out of misery, which, in a few minutes, he
reported having accomplished, by running his sabre into the animal’s
heart. Even _he_ evinced feeling on this occasion. Meantime the roar
of cannon and musketry in the main position never slackened; it was
intense, as was the smoke arising from it. Amidst this, from time
to time, was to be seen still more dense columns of smoke rising
straight into the air like a great pillar, then spreading out a
mushroom-head. These arose from the explosions of ammunition-waggons,
which were continually taking place, although the noise which filled
the whole atmosphere was too overpowering to allow them to be heard.

Amongst the multitudes of French cavalry continually pouring over
the front ridge, one corps came sweeping down the slope entire, and
was directing its course straight for us, when suddenly a regiment
of light dragoons (I believe of the German Legion) came up from the
ravine at a brisk trot on their flank. The French had barely time
to wheel up to the left and push their horses into a gallop, when
the two bodies came in collision. They were at a very short distance
from us, so that we saw the charge perfectly. There was no check,
no hesitation, on either side; both parties seemed to dash on in a
most reckless manner, and we fully expected to have seen a horrid
crash--no such thing! Each, as if by mutual consent, opened their
files on coming near, and passed rapidly through each other, cutting
and pointing, much in the same manner one might pass the fingers of
the right hand through those of the left. We saw but few fall. The
two corps re-formed afterwards, and in a twinkling both disappeared,
I know not how or where. It might have been about two o’clock when
Colonel Gould, R.A., came to me, perhaps a little later. Be that as
it may, we were conversing on the subject of our situation, which
appeared to him rather desperate. He remarked that in the event of a
retreat, there was but one road, which no doubt would be instantly
choked up, and asked my opinion. My answer was, “It does indeed look
very bad; but I trust in the Duke, who, I am sure, will get us out of
it somehow or other.” Meantime gloomy reflections arose in my mind,
for though I did not choose to betray myself (as we spoke before the
men), yet I could not help thinking that our affairs _were_ rather
desperate, and that some unfortunate catastrophe was at hand. In this
case I made up my mind to spike my guns and retreat over the fields,
draught-horses and all, in the best manner I could, steering well
from the highroad and general line of retreat.

We were still talking on this subject, when suddenly a dark mass of
cavalry appeared for an instant on the main ridge, and then came
sweeping down the slope in swarms, reminding me of an enormous surf
bursting over the prostrate hull of a stranded vessel, and then
running, hissing and foaming, up the beach. The hollow space became
in a twinkling covered with horsemen, crossing, turning, and riding
about in all directions, apparently without any object. Sometimes
they came pretty near us, then would retire a little. There were
lancers amongst them, hussars, and dragoons--it was a complete
_mêlée_. On the main ridge no squares were to be seen; the only
objects were a few guns standing in a confused manner, with muzzles
in the air, and not one artilleryman. After caracoling about for a
few minutes, the crowd began to separate and draw together in small
bodies, which continually increased; and now we really apprehended
being overwhelmed, as the first line had apparently been. For a
moment an awful silence pervaded that part of the position to which
we anxiously turned our eyes. “I fear all is over,” said Colonel
Gould, who still remained by me. The thing seemed but too likely,
and this time I could not withhold my assent to his remark, for it
did indeed appear so. Meantime the 14th, springing from the earth,
had formed their square, whilst we, throwing back the guns of our
right and left divisions, stood waiting in momentary expectation of
being enveloped and attacked. Still they lingered in the hollow,
when suddenly loud and repeated shouts (not English hurrahs) drew
our attention to the other side. There we saw two dense columns of
infantry pushing forward at a quick pace towards us, crossing the
fields, as if they had come from Merke Braine. Every one, both of
the 14th and ourselves, pronounced them French, yet still we delayed
opening fire on them. Shouting, yelling, and singing, on they came,
right for us; and being now not above 800 or 1000 yards distant, it
seemed folly allowing them to come nearer unmolested. The commanding
officer of the 14th, to end our doubts, rode forward and endeavoured
to ascertain who they were, but soon returned, assuring us they were
French. The order was already given to fire, when, luckily, Colonel
Gould recognised them as Belgians. Meantime, whilst my attention was
occupied by these people, the cavalry had all vanished, nobody could
say how or where.

We breathed again. Such was the agitated state in which we were kept
in our second position. A third act was about to commence of a much
more stirring and active nature.

It might have been, as nearly as I can recollect, about three P.M.,
when Sir Augustus Frazer galloped up, crying out, “Left limber
up, and as fast as you can.” The words were scarcely uttered when
my gallant troop stood as desired in column of subdivisions, left
in front, pointing towards the main ridge. “At a gallop, march!”
and away we flew, as steadily and compactly as if at a review. I
rode with Frazer, whose face was as black as a chimney-sweep’s from
the smoke, and the jacket-sleeve of his right arm torn open by a
musket-ball or case-shot, which had merely grazed his flesh. As we
went along, he told me that the enemy had assembled an enormous mass
of heavy cavalry in front of the point to which he was leading us
(about one-third of the distance between Hougoumont and the Charleroi
road), and that in all probability we should immediately be charged
on gaining our position. “_The Duke’s orders, however, are positive,”
he added, “that in the event of their persevering and charging home,
you do not expose your men, but retire with them into the adjacent
squares of infantry._” As he spoke, we were ascending the reverse
slope of the main position. We breathed a new atmosphere--the air
was suffocatingly hot, resembling that issuing from an oven. We were
enveloped in thick smoke, and, _malgré_ the incessant roar of cannon
and musketry, could distinctly hear around us a mysterious humming
noise, like that which one hears of a summer’s evening proceeding
from myriads of black beetles; cannon-shot, too, ploughed the ground
in all directions, and so thick was the hail of balls and bullets
that it seemed dangerous to extend the arm lest it should be torn
off. In spite of the serious situation in which we were, I could
not help being somewhat amused at the astonishment expressed by our
kind-hearted surgeon (Hitchins), who heard for the first time this
sort of music. He was close to me as we ascended the slope, and,
hearing this infernal _carillon_ about his ears, began staring round
in the wildest and most comic manner imaginable, twisting himself
from side to side, exclaiming, “My God, Mercer, what _is_ that? What
_is_ all this noise? How curious!--how very curious!” And then when a
cannon-shot rushed hissing past, “_There!--there!_ What _is_ it all?”
It was with great difficulty that I persuaded him to retire: for a
time he insisted on remaining near me, and it was only by pointing
out how important it was to us, in case of being wounded, that he
should keep himself safe to be able to assist us, that I prevailed on
him to withdraw. Amidst this storm we gained the summit of the ridge,
strange to say, without a casualty; and Sir Augustus, pointing
out our position between two squares of Brunswick infantry, left
us with injunctions to remember the Duke’s order, and to economise
our ammunition. The Brunswickers were falling fast--the shot every
moment making great gaps in their squares, which the officers and
sergeants were actively employed in filling up by pushing their men
together, and sometimes thumping them ere they could make them move.
These were the very boys whom I had but yesterday seen throwing
away their arms, and fleeing, panic-stricken, from the very sound
of our horses’ feet. To-day they fled not bodily, to be sure, but
spiritually, for their senses seemed to have left them. There they
stood, with recovered arms, like so many logs, or rather like the
very wooden figures which I had seen them practising at in their
cantonments. Every moment I feared they would again throw down their
arms and flee; but their officers and sergeants behaved nobly, not
only keeping them together, but managing to keep their squares closed
in spite of the carnage made amongst them. To have sought refuge
amongst men in such a state were madness--the very moment our men
ran from their guns, I was convinced, would be the signal for their
disbanding. We had better, then, fall at our posts than in such a
situation. Our coming up seemed to reanimate them, and all their
eyes were directed to us--indeed, it was providential, for, had we
not arrived as we did, I scarcely think there is a doubt of what
would have been their fate.[19] Our first gun had scarcely gained
the interval between their squares, when I saw through the smoke the
leading squadrons of the advancing column coming on at a brisk trot,
and already not more than one hundred yards distant, if so much, for
I don’t think we could have seen so far. I immediately ordered the
line to be formed for action--_case-shot!_ and the leading gun was
unlimbered and commenced firing almost as soon as the word was given:
for activity and intelligence our men were unrivalled. The very first
round, I saw, brought down several men and horses. They continued,
however, to advance. I glanced at the Brunswickers, and that glance
told me it would not do; they had opened a fire from their front
faces, but both squares appeared too unsteady, and I resolved to
say nothing about the Duke’s order, and take our chance--a resolve
that was strengthened by the effect of the remaining guns as they
rapidly succeeded in coming to action, making terrible slaughter,
and in an instant covering the ground with men and horses. Still
they persevered in approaching us (the first round had brought them
to a walk), though slowly, and it did seem they would ride over
us. We were a little below the level of the ground on which they
moved--having in front of us a bank of about a foot and a half or
two feet high, along the top of which ran a narrow road--and this
gave more effect to our case-shot, all of which almost must have
taken effect, for the carnage was frightful.[20] I suppose this state
of things occupied but a few seconds, when I observed symptoms of
hesitation, and in a twinkling, at the instant I thought it was all
over with us, they turned to either flank and filed away rapidly to
the rear. Retreat of the mass, however, was not so easy. Many facing
about and trying to force their way through the body of the column,
that part next to us became a complete mob, into which we kept a
steady fire of case-shot from our six pieces. The effect is hardly
conceivable, and to paint this scene of slaughter and confusion
impossible. Every discharge was followed by the fall of numbers,
whilst the survivors struggled with each other, and I actually saw
them using the pommels of their swords to fight their way out of the
_mêlée_. Some, rendered desperate at finding themselves thus pent up
at the muzzles of our guns, as it were, and others carried away by
their horses, maddened with wounds, dashed through our intervals--few
thinking of using their swords, but pushing furiously onward, intent
only on saving themselves. At last the rear of the column, wheeling
about, opened a passage, and the whole swept away at a much more
rapid pace than they had advanced, nor stopped until the swell of the
ground covered them from our fire. We then ceased firing; but as they
were still not far off, for we saw the tops of their caps, having
reloaded, we stood ready to receive them should they renew the attack.

One of, if not the first man who fell on our side was wounded by his
own gun. Gunner Butterworth was one of the greatest pickles in the
troop, but, at the same time, a most daring, active soldier; he was
No. 7 (the man who sponged, &c.) at his gun. He had just finished
ramming down the shot, and was stepping back outside the wheel, when
his foot stuck in the miry soil, pulling him forward at the moment
the gun was fired. As a man naturally does when falling, he threw
out both his arms before him, and they were blown off at the elbows.
He raised himself a little on his two stumps, and looked up most
piteously in my face. To assist him was impossible--the safety of
all, everything, depended upon not slackening our fire, and I was
obliged to turn from him. The state of anxious activity in which
we were kept all day, and the numbers who fell almost immediately
afterwards, caused me to lose sight of poor Butterworth; and I
afterwards learned that he had succeeded in rising and was gone to
the rear; but on inquiring for him next day, some of my people who
had been sent to Waterloo told me that they saw his body lying by the
roadside near the farm of Mount St Jean--bled to death! The retreat
of the cavalry was succeeded by a shower of shot and shells, which
must have annihilated us had not the little bank covered and threw
most of them over us. Still some reached us and knocked down men and
horses.

At the first charge, the French column was composed of grenadiers à
cheval[21] and cuirassiers, the former in front. I forget whether
they had or had not changed this disposition, but think, from the
number of cuirasses we afterwards found, that the cuirassiers led
the second attack. Be this as it may, their column reassembled. They
prepared for a second attempt, sending up a cloud of skirmishers,
who galled us terribly by a fire of carbines and pistols at scarcely
40 yards from our front. We were obliged to stand with port-fires
lighted, so that it was not without a little difficulty that I
succeeded in restraining the people from firing, for they grew
impatient under such fatal results. Seeing some exertion beyond words
necessary for this purpose, I leaped my horse up the little bank,
and began a promenade (by no means agreeable) up and down our front,
without even drawing my sword, though these fellows were within
speaking distance of me. This quieted my men; but the tall blue
gentlemen, seeing me thus dare them, immediately made a target of me,
and commenced a very deliberate practice, to show us what very bad
shots they were and verify the old artillery proverb, “The nearer the
target, the safer you are.” One fellow certainly made me flinch, but
it was a miss; so I shook my finger at him, and called him _coquin_,
&c. The rogue grinned as he reloaded, and again took aim. I certainly
felt rather foolish at that moment, but was ashamed, after such
bravado, to let him see it, and therefore continued my promenade. As
if to prolong my torment, he was a terrible time about it. To me it
seemed an age. Whenever I turned, the muzzle of his infernal carbine
still followed me. At length bang it went, and whiz came the ball
close to the back of my neck, and at the same instant down dropped
the leading driver of one of my guns (Miller), into whose forehead
the cursed missile had penetrated.

The column now once more mounted the plateau, and these popping
gentry wheeled off right and left to clear the ground for their
charge. The spectacle was imposing, and if ever the word sublime
was appropriately applied, it might surely be to it. On they came
in compact squadrons, one behind the other, so numerous that those
of the rear were still below the brow when the head of the column
was but at some sixty or seventy yards from our guns. Their pace
was a slow but steady trot. None of your furious galloping charges
was this, but a deliberate advance, at a deliberate pace, as of men
resolved to carry their point. They moved in profound silence, and
the only sound that could be heard from them amidst the incessant
roar of battle was the low thunder-like reverberation of the ground
beneath the simultaneous tread of so many horses. On our part was
equal deliberation. Every man stood steadily at his post, the guns
ready, loaded with a round-shot first and a case over it; the tubes
were in the vents; the port-fires glared and sputtered behind the
wheels; and my word alone was wanting to hurl destruction on that
goodly show of gallant men and noble horses. I delayed this, for
experience had given me confidence. The Brunswickers partook of this
feeling, and with their squares--much reduced in point of size--well
closed, stood firmly, with arms at the recover, and eyes fixed on
us, ready to commence their fire with our first discharge. It was
indeed a grand and imposing spectacle! The column[22] was led on
this time by an officer in a rich uniform, his breast covered with
decorations, whose earnest gesticulations were strangely contrasted
with the solemn demeanour of those to whom they were addressed. I
thus allowed them to advance unmolested until the head of the column
might have been about fifty or sixty yards from us, and then gave the
word, “Fire!” The effect was terrible. Nearly the whole leading rank
fell at once; and the round-shot, penetrating the column, carried
confusion throughout its extent. The ground, already encumbered with
victims of the first struggle, became now almost impassable. Still,
however, these devoted warriors struggled on, intent only on reaching
us. The thing was impossible. Our guns were served with astonishing
activity, whilst the running fire of the two squares was maintained
with spirit. Those who pushed forward over the heaps of carcasses
of men and horses gained but a few paces in advance, there to fall
in their turn and add to the difficulties of those succeeding them.
The discharge of every gun was followed by a fall of men and horses
like that of grass before the mower’s scythe. When the horse alone
was killed, we could see the cuirassiers divesting themselves of the
encumbrance and making their escape on foot. Still, for a moment, the
confused mass (for all order was at an end) stood before us, vainly
trying to urge their horses over the obstacles presented by their
fallen comrades, in obedience to the now loud and rapid vociferations
of him who had led them on and remained unhurt. As before, many
cleared everything and rode through us; many came plunging forward
only to fall, man and horse, close to the muzzles of our guns; but
the majority again turned at the very moment when, from having less
ground to go over, it were safer to advance than retire, and sought
a passage to the rear. Of course the same confusion, struggle amongst
themselves, and slaughter prevailed as before, until gradually they
disappeared over the brow of the hill. We ceased firing, glad to take
breath. Their retreat exposed us, as before, to a shower of shot
and shells: these last, falling amongst us with very long fuses,
kept burning and hissing a long time before they burst, and were a
considerable annoyance to man and horse. The bank in front, however,
again stood our friend, and sent many over us innocuous.

Lieutenant Breton, who had already lost two horses, and had mounted a
troop-horse, was conversing with me during this our leisure moment.
As his horse stood at right angles to mine, the poor jaded animal
dozingly rested his muzzle on my thigh; whilst I, the better to hear
amidst the infernal din, leant forward, resting my arm between his
ears. In this attitude a cannon-shot smashed the horse’s head to
atoms. The headless trunk sank to the ground--Breton looking pale
as death, expecting, as he afterwards told me, that I was cut in
two. What was passing to the right and left of us I know no more
about than the man in the moon--not even what corps were beyond
the Brunswickers. The smoke confined our vision to a very small
compass, so that my battle was restricted to the two squares and my
own battery; and, as long as we maintained our ground, I thought it
a matter of course that others did so too. It was just after this
accident that our worthy commanding officer of artillery, Sir George
Adam Wood, made his appearance through the smoke a little way from
our left flank. As I said, we were doing nothing, for the cavalry
were under the brow re-forming for a third attack, and we were
being pelted by their artillery. “D--n it, Mercer,” said the old
man, blinking as a man does when facing a gale of wind, “you have
hot work of it here.” “Yes, sir, pretty hot;” and I was proceeding
with an account of the two charges we had already discomfited, and
the prospect of a third, when, glancing that way, I perceived their
leading squadron already on the plateau. “There they are again!” I
exclaimed; and, darting from Sir George _sans cérémonie_, was just
in time to meet them with the same destruction as before. This time,
indeed, it was child’s play. They could not even approach us in any
decent order, and we fired most deliberately; it was folly having
attempted the thing. I was sitting on my horse near the right of my
battery as they turned and began to retire once more. Intoxicated
with success, I was singing out, “Beautiful!--beautiful!” and my
right arm was flourishing about, when some one from behind, seizing
it, said quietly, “Take care, or you’ll strike the Duke;” and in
effect our noble chief, with a serious air, and apparently much
fatigued, passed close by me to the front, without seeming to take
the slightest notice of the remnant of the French cavalry still
lingering on the ground. This obliged us to cease firing; and at the
same moment I, perceiving a line of infantry ascending from the rear,
slowly, with ported arms, and uttering a sort of feeble, suppressed
hurrah--ankle-deep in a thick tenacious mud, and threading their way
amongst or stepping over the numerous corpses covering the ground,
out of breath from their exertions, and hardly preserving a line,
broken everywhere into large gaps the breadth of several files--could
not but meditate on the probable results of the last charge had I, in
obedience to the Duke’s order, retired my men into the squares and
allowed the daring and formidable squadrons a passage to our rear,
where they must have gone thundering down on this disjointed line.
The summit gained, the line was amended, files closed in, and the
whole, including our Brunswickers, advanced down the slope towards
the plain.

Although the infantry lost several men as they passed us, yet on
the whole the cannonade began to slacken on both sides (why, I know
not), and, the smoke clearing away a little, I had now, for the first
time, a good view of the field. On the ridge opposite to us dark
masses of troops were stationary, or moving down into the intervening
plain. Our own advancing infantry were hid from view by the ground.
We therefore recommenced firing at the enemies’ masses, and the
cannonade, spreading, soon became general again along the line.
Whilst thus occupied with our front, we suddenly became sensible of
a most destructive flanking fire from a battery which had come, the
Lord knows how, and established itself on a knoll somewhat higher
than the ground we stood on, and only about 400 or 500 yards a
little in advance of our left flank. The rapidity and precision of
this fire were quite appalling. Every shot almost took effect, and
I certainly expected we should all be annihilated. Our horses and
limbers, being a little retired down the slope, had hitherto been
somewhat under cover from the direct fire in front; but this plunged
right amongst them, knocking them down by pairs, and creating
horrible confusion. The drivers could hardly extricate themselves
from one dead horse ere another fell, or perhaps themselves. The
saddle-bags, in many instances, were torn from the horses’ backs,
and their contents scattered over the field. One shell I saw explode
under the two finest wheel-horses in the troop--down they dropped.
In some instances the horses of a gun or ammunition-waggon remained,
and all their drivers were killed.[23] The whole livelong day had
cost us nothing like this. Our gunners too--the few left fit for duty
of them--were so exhausted that they were unable to run the guns up
after firing, consequently at every round they retreated nearer to
the limbers; and as we had pointed our two left guns towards the
people who were annoying us so terribly, they soon came altogether
in a confused heap, the trails crossing each other, and the whole
dangerously near the limbers and ammunition-waggons, some of which
were totally unhorsed, and others in sad confusion from the loss of
their drivers and horses, many of them lying dead in their harness
attached to their carriages. I sighed for my poor troop--it was
already but a wreck.

I had dismounted, and was assisting at one of the guns to encourage
my poor exhausted men, when through the smoke a black speck caught
my eye, and I instantly knew what it was. The conviction that one
never sees a shot coming towards you unless directly in its line
flashed across my mind, together with the certainty that my doom was
sealed. I had barely time to exclaim “Here it is then!”--much in that
gasping sort of way one does when going into very cold water takes
away the breath--“whush” it went past my face, striking the point of
my pelisse collar, which was lying open, and smash into a horse close
behind me. I breathed freely again.

Under such a fire, one may be said to have had a thousand narrow
escapes; and, in good truth, I frequently experienced that
displacement of air against my face caused by the passing of shot
close to me; but the two above recorded, and a third which I shall
mention, were remarkable ones, and made me feel in full force the
goodness of Him who protected me among so many dangers. Whilst
in position on the right of the second line, I had reproved some
of my men for lying down when shells fell near them until they
burst. Now my turn came. A shell, with a long fuse, came slop
into the mud at my feet, and there lay fizzing and flaring, to
my infinite discomfiture. After what I had said on the subject, I
felt that I must act up to my own words, and, accordingly, there I
stood, endeavouring to look quite composed until the cursed thing
burst--and, strange to say, without injuring me, though so near.
The effect on my men was good. We had scarcely fired many rounds
at the enfilading battery when a tall man in the black Brunswick
uniform came galloping up to me from the rear, exclaiming, “Ah! mine
Gott!--mine Gott! vat is it you doos, sare? Dat is your friends
de Proosiens; an you kills dem! Ah, mine Gott!--mine Gott! vill
you no stop, sare?--vill you no stop? Ah! mine Gott!--mine Gott!
vat for is dis? De Inglish kills dere friends de Proosiens! Vere
is de Dook von Vellington?--vere is de Dook von Vellington? Oh,
mine Gott!--mine Gott!” &c. &c., and so he went on raving like one
demented. I observed that if these were our friends the Prussians
they were treating us very uncivilly; and that it was not without
sufficient provocation we had turned our guns on them, pointing out
to him at the same time the bloody proofs of my assertion. Apparently
not noticing what I said, he continued his lamentations, and, “Vill
you no stop, sare, I say?” Wherefore, thinking he might be right,
to pacify him I ordered the whole to cease firing, desiring him to
remark the consequences. _Psieu, psieu, psieu_, came our _friends’_
shot, one after another; and our friend himself had a narrow escape
from one of them. “Now, sir,” I said, “you will be convinced; and we
will continue our firing, whilst you can ride round the way you came,
and tell them they kill their friends the English; the moment their
fire ceases, so shall mine.” Still he lingered, exclaiming, “Oh, dis
is terreebly to see de Proosien and de Inglish kill vonanoder!” At
last darting off I saw no more of him.[24] The fire continued on both
sides, mine becoming slacker and slacker, for we were reduced to the
last extremity, and must have been annihilated but for the opportune
arrival of a battery of Belgic artillery a little on our left, which,
taking the others in flank nearly at point blank, soon silenced and
drove them off. We were so reduced that all our strength was barely
sufficient to load and fire three guns out of our six.

These Belgians were all beastly drunk, and, when they first came up,
not at all particular as to which way they fired; and it was only
by keeping an eye on them that they were prevented treating us, and
even one another. The wretches had probably already done mischief
elsewhere--who knows? My recollections of the latter part of this day
are rather confused; I was fatigued, and almost deaf. I recollect
clearly, however, that we had ceased firing--the plain below being
covered with masses of troops, which we could not distinguish from
each other. Captain Walcot of the horse-artillery had come to us, and
we were all looking out anxiously at the movements below and on the
opposite ridge, when he suddenly shouted out, “Victory!--victory!
they fly!--they fly!” and sure enough we saw some of the masses
dissolving, as it were, and those composing them streaming away in
confused crowds over the field, whilst the already desultory fire of
their artillery ceased altogether. I shall never forget this joyful
moment!--this moment of exultation! On looking round I found we were
left almost alone. Cavalry and infantry had all moved forward, and
only a few guns here and there were to be seen on the position. A
little to our right were the remains of Major M‘Donald’s troop under
Lieutenant Sandilands, which had suffered much, but nothing like us.
We were congratulating ourselves on the happy results of the day,
when an aide-de-camp rode up, crying “_Forward, sir!--forward! It is
of the utmost importance that this movement should be supported by
artillery!_” at the same time waving his hat much in the manner of a
huntsman laying on his dogs. I smiled at his energy, and, pointing to
the remains of my poor troop, quietly asked, “_How, sir?_” A glance
was sufficient to show him the impossibility, and away he went.

Our situation was indeed terrible: of 200 fine horses with which we
had entered the battle, upwards of 140 lay dead, dying, or severely
wounded. Of the men, scarcely two-thirds of those necessary for four
guns remained, and these so completely exhausted as to be totally
incapable of further exertion. Lieutenant Breton had three horses
killed under him; Lieutenant Hincks was wounded in the breast by a
spent ball; Lieutenant Leathes on the hip by a splinter; and although
untouched myself, my horse had no less than eight wounds, one of
which--a graze on the fetlock joint--lamed him for ever. Our guns
and carriages were, as before mentioned, altogether in a confused
heap, intermingled with dead and wounded horses, which it had not
been possible to disengage from them. My poor men, such at least as
were untouched, fairly worn out, their clothes, faces, &c., blackened
by the smoke and spattered over with mud and blood, had seated
themselves on the trails of the carriages, or had thrown themselves
on the wet and polluted soil, too fatigued to think of anything
but gaining a little rest. Such was our situation when called upon
to advance! It was impossible, and we remained where we were. For
myself, I was also excessively tired--hoarse, to making speech
painful, and deaf from the infernal uproar of the last eleven hours.
Moreover, I was devoured by a burning thirst, not a drop of liquid
having passed my lips since the evening of the 16th; but although,
with the exception of the chicken’s leg last night, I may be said to
have eaten nothing for two whole days, yet did I not feel the least
desire for food.

The evening had become fine, and but for an occasional groan or
lament from some poor sufferer, and the repeated piteous neighing
of wounded horses, tranquillity might be said to reign over the
field. As it got dusk, a large body of Prussian artillery arrived,
and formed their bivouac near us. There was not light to see more
of them than that their brass guns were kept bright, and that their
carriages were encumbered with baggage, and, besides, appeared but
clumsy machines when compared with ours. All wore their greatcoats,
which apparently they had marched in. As they looked at us rather
scowlingly, and did not seem inclined to hold any communication with
us, I soon returned to my own people, whom I found preparing to go
supperless to bed--the two remaining officers, the non-commissioned
officers and men having all got together in a heap, with some painted
covers spread under and others drawn over them--at a distance from
our guns, &c., the neighbourhood of which, they said, was too
horrible to think of sleeping there. For my part, after standing all
day amongst all these horrors, I felt no squeamishness about sleeping
amongst them; so pulling down the painted cover of a limber over
the footboard in the manner of a tent roof, I crept under it, and
endeavoured to sleep. The cramped situation in which I lay, and the
feverish excitement of my mind, forbade, however, my obtaining that
sound and refreshing sleep so much needed--I only dozed. From one
of these dozes I awoke about midnight, chilled and cramped to death
from the awkward doubled-up position imposed upon me by my short and
narrow bed. So up I got to look around and contemplate a battle-field
by the pale moonlight. The night was serene and pretty clear; a
few light clouds occasionally passing across the moon’s disc, and
throwing objects into transient obscurity, added considerably to the
solemnity of the scene. Oh, it was a thrilling sensation thus to
stand in the silent hour of the night and contemplate that field--all
day long the theatre of noise and strife, now so calm and still--the
actors prostrate on the bloody soil, their pale wan faces upturned to
the moon’s cold beams, which caps and breastplates, and a thousand
other things, reflected back in brilliant pencils of light from as
many different points! Here and there some poor wretch, sitting up
amidst the countless dead, busied himself in endeavours to stanch the
flowing stream with which his life was fast ebbing away. Many whom
I saw so employed that night were, when morning dawned, lying stiff
and tranquil as those who had departed earlier. From time to time
a figure would half raise itself from the ground, and then, with
a despairing groan, fall back again. Others, slowly and painfully
rising, stronger, or having less deadly hurt, would stagger away with
uncertain steps across the field in search of succour. Many of these
I followed with my gaze until lost in the obscurity of distance;
but many, alas! after staggering a few paces, would sink again on
the ground, probably to rise no more. It was heart-rending--and yet
I gazed! Horses, too, there were to claim our pity--mild, patient,
enduring. Some lay on the ground with their entrails hanging out, and
yet they lived. These would occasionally attempt to rise, but, like
their human bed-fellows, quickly falling back again, would lift their
poor heads, and, turning a wistful gaze at their side, lie quietly
down again, to repeat the same until strength no longer remained, and
then, their eyes gently closing, one short convulsive struggle closed
their sufferings. One poor animal excited painful interest--he had
lost, I believe, both his hind legs; and there he sat the long night
through on his tail, looking about, as if in expectation of coming
aid, sending forth, from time to time, long and protracted melancholy
neighing. Although I knew that killing him at once would be mercy, I
could not muster courage even to give the order. Blood enough I had
seen shed during the last six-and-thirty hours, and sickened at the
thought of shedding more. There, then, he still sat when we left the
ground, neighing after us, as if reproaching our desertion of him in
the hour of need.

The Prussian bivouac near at hand offered a far different and more
cheering scene. There all was life and movement. Their handsome
horses, standing harnessed and tied to the carriages, sent forth
neighings of another character. Dark forms moved amongst them; and
by the bivouac-fires sat figures that would have furnished studies
for a Salvator. Dark, brown, stern visages, rendered still sterner by
the long drooping mustache that overshadowed the mouth, from which
appended their constant companion, the pipe. Many there were, too,
busily occupied with the first great care of all animals--cooking,
or eating the mess already cooked. Save these I have mentioned,
no living being moved on the moon-lit field; and as I cast up my
eyes at the lustrous lamp of heaven, I thought on the thousand dear
connections far, far away, on whose peaceful dwelling it now looked
down, their inmates sleeping in tranquil security, ignorant as yet
of the fatal blow which had now for ever severed them from those
they loved, whose bodies encumbered the ground around me. And here,
even here, what a contrast between this charnel-house and the distant
landscape within my ken! Over it the same fair planet shed her mild
beams, illuminating its groves and yellow corn-fields, its still and
quiet villages, whose modest spires here and there arose from the
horizon--emblems of peace, tranquillity, and repose. Long I continued
to gaze on this sad and solemn scene; and all this slaughter, I said,
to gratify the ambition of one man, and that man--whom?--one who has
risen from a station humble as my own, has already devastated Europe,
and filled it with blood and mourning--who only recently left behind
him 400,000 gallant men, a prey to the sword and the intemperance of
a northern clime--fearful holocaust on the altar of that ambition!

At length I again crept into my cell, and again slept by fits and
starts, until the first blush of day reddened the eastern sky, and
aroused us all to new exertion. As I emerged from under my cover a
shudder crept over me, when the stronger light of day enabled me to
see the corpse of one of my drivers lying mangled and bloody beneath
my lair.




CHAPTER XIV.


_19th._--The cool air of the morning lasted not long; the rising sun
soon burst in all his glory over our bloody bivouac, and all nature
arose into renewed life, except the victims of ambition which lay
unconscious of his presence. I had not been up many minutes when
one of my sergeants came to ask if they might bury Driver Crammond.
“And why particularly Driver Crammond?” “Because he looks frightful,
sir; many of us have not had a wink of sleep for him.” Curious! I
walked to the spot where he lay, and certainly a more hideous sight
cannot be imagined. A cannon-shot had carried away the whole head
except barely the visage, which still remained attached to the torn
and bloody neck. The men said they had been prevented sleeping by
seeing his eyes fixed on them all night; and thus this one dreadful
object had superseded all the other horrors by which they were
surrounded. He was of course immediately buried, and as immediately
forgotten. Our first care after this was to muster the remaining
force, to disentangle our carriages from each other, and from the
dead and dying animals with which they were encumbered. Many sound
or only slightly-wounded horses, belonging to different corps of
both armies, were wandering about the field. Of these we caught
several in the course of the morning, and thus collected, with what
remained of our own fit for work, sufficient to horse four guns,
three ammunition-waggons, and the forge. Of men we had nearly enough
for these at reduced numbers, so we set to work equipping ourselves
without delay. Although supplies of ammunition had been sent to us
during the action, yet little remained. The expenditure had been
enormous. A return had been called for yesterday evening just as
we were lying down to rest, but, fatigued as we all were, it was
impossible to give this correctly. As near as I could ascertain, we
must have fired nearly 700 rounds per gun. Our harness, &c., was so
cut to pieces, that but for the vast magazines around us from which
we could pick and choose, we should never have got off the field.
Soon after daybreak an officer came from headquarters to desire
me to send all my superfluous carriages to Lillois, where a park
was forming, and to inform me that a supply of ammunition would be
found in the village of Waterloo. Accordingly the carriages were
sent without delay; but this requiring all the horses, they were
obliged to make a second trip for the ammunition. Whilst this was
doing I had leisure to examine the ground in our immediate vicinity.
Books and papers, &c., covered it in all directions. The books at
first surprised me, but upon examination the thing was explained.
Each French soldier, it appeared, carried a little accompt-book of
his pay, clothing, &c. &c. The scene was now far from solitary;
for numerous groups of peasants were moving about busily employed
stripping the dead, and perhaps finishing those not quite so. Some of
these men I met fairly staggering under the enormous load of clothes,
&c., they had collected. Some had firearms, swords, &c., and many had
large bunches of crosses and decorations; all seemed in high glee,
and professed unbounded hatred of the French.

I had fancied we were almost alone on the field, seeing only the
remains of Major Bull’s troop of horse-artillery not far from us (the
Prussians had gone forward about, or a little before, daybreak);
but in wandering towards the Charleroi road I stumbled on a whole
regiment of British infantry fast asleep, in columns of divisions,
wrapped in their blankets, with their knapsacks for pillows. Not a
man was awake. There they lay in regular ranks, with the officers and
sergeants in their places, just as they would stand when awake. Not
far from these, in a little hollow beneath a white thorn, lay two
Irish light-infantry men sending forth such howlings and wailings,
and oaths and execrations, as were shocking to hear. One of them had
his leg shot off, the other a thigh smashed by a cannon-shot. They
were certainly pitiable objects, but their vehement exclamations,
&c., were so strongly contrasted with the quiet resolute bearing of
hundreds, both French and English, around them, that it blunted one’s
feelings considerably.

I tried in vain to pacify them; so walked away amidst a volley of
abuse as a hardhearted wretch who could thus leave two poor fellows
to die like dogs. What could I do? All, however, though in more
modest terms, craved assistance; and every poor wretch begged most
earnestly for water. Some of my men had discovered a good well of
uncontaminated water at Hougoumont, and filled their canteens; so I
made several of them accompany me and administer to the most craving
in our immediate vicinity. Nothing could exceed their gratitude,
or the fervent blessings they implored on us for this momentary
relief. The French were in general particularly grateful; and those
who were strong enough, entered into conversation with us on the
events of yesterday, and the probable fate awaiting themselves.
All the non-commissioned officers and privates agreed in asserting
that they had been deceived by their officers and betrayed; and, to
my surprise, almost all of them reviled Buonaparte as the cause of
their misery. Many begged me to kill them at once, since they would
a thousand times rather die by the hand of a soldier than be left
at the mercy of those villanous Belgic peasants. Whilst we stood by
them, several would appear consoled and become tranquil; but the
moment we attempted to leave, they invariably renewed the cry, “Ah,
Monsieur, tuez moi donc! Tuez moi, pour l’amour de Dieu!” &c. &c.
It was in vain I assured them carts would be sent to pick them all
up. Nothing could reconcile them to the idea of being left. They
looked on us as brother soldiers, and knew we were too honourable to
harm them: “But the moment you go, those vile peasants will first
insult, and then cruelly murder us.” This, alas! I knew, was but too
true. One Frenchman I found in a far different humour--an officer
of lancers, and desperately wounded; a strong square-built man,
with reddish hair and speckled complexion. When I approached him
he appeared suffering horribly--rolling on his back, uttering loud
groans. My first impulse was to raise and place him in a sitting
posture; but, the moment he was touched, opening his eyes and seeing
me, he became perfectly furious. Supposing he mistook my intention,
I addressed him in a soothing tone, begging he would allow me to
render him what little assistance was in my power. This only seemed
to irritate him the more; and on my presenting him the canteen
with water, he dashed it from him with such a passionate gesture
and emphatic “_Non!_” that I saw there was no use in teasing, and
therefore reluctantly left him. Returning towards our position, I
was forcibly struck by the immense heap of bodies of men and horses
which distinguished it even at a distance; indeed, Sir Augustus
Frazer told me the other day, at Nivelles, that in riding over the
field, “_he could plainly distinguish the position of G troop from
the opposite height by the dark mass which, even from that distance,
formed a remarkable feature in the field_.” These were his very
words. One interesting sufferer I had nearly forgotten. He was a
fine young man of the grenadiers à cheval, who had lain groaning
near us all night--indeed scarcely five paces from my bed; therefore
was the first person I visited as soon as daylight came. He was a
most interesting person--tall, handsome, and a perfect gentleman in
manners and speech; yet his costume was that of a private soldier.
We conversed with him some time, and were exceedingly pleased with
his mild and amiable address. Amongst other things he told us that
Marshal Ney had led the charges against us. In this, however (if
we understood him rightly), he must have been mistaken, since that
Marshal is an infantry general. Be that as it may, we all felt deeply
interested for our unfortunate prisoner, and did all in our power for
him, which consisted in kind words and sending two careful men to
lead him to the village--a most painful undertaking, for we now found
that, besides one ball in the forehead, he had received another in
his right thigh, which, together with his being barefooted, could not
but render his journey both tedious and painful.

I now began to feel somewhat the effects of my long fast in a most
unpleasant sense of weakness and an inordinate craving for food,
which there were no means of satisfying. My joy, then, may be
imagined when, returning to our bivouac, I found our people returned
from Lillois, and, better still, that they had brought with them a
quarter of veal, which they had found in a muddy ditch, of course in
appearance then filthy enough. What was this to a parcel of men who
had scarcely eaten a morsel for three days? In a trice it was cut
up, the mud having been scraped off with a sabre, a fire kindled and
fed with lance-shafts and musket-stocks; and old Quartermaster Hall,
undertaking the cooking, proceeded to fry the dirty lumps in the lid
of a camp-kettle. How we enjoyed the savoury smell! and, having made
ourselves seats of cuirasses,[25] piled upon each other, we soon
had that most agreeable of animal gratifications--the filling our
empty stomachs. Never was a meal more perfectly military, nor more
perfectly enjoyed.

We had not yet finished our meal, when a carriage drove on the ground
from Brussels, the inmates of which, alighting, proceeded to examine
the field. As they passed near us, it was amusing to see the horror
with which they eyed our frightful figures; they all, however,
pulled off their hats and made us low bows. One, a smartly-dressed
middle-aged man, in a high cocked-hat, came to our circle, and
entered into conversation with me on the events of yesterday. He
approached holding a delicately white perfumed handkerchief to his
nose; stepping carefully to avoid the bodies (at which he cast
fearful glances _en passant_), to avoid polluting the glossy silken
hose that clothed his nether limbs. May I be pardoned for the
comparison: Hotspur’s description of a fop came forcibly to my mind
as we conversed; clean and spruce, as if from a bandbox, redolent of
perfume, he stood ever and anon applying the ’kerchief to his nose.
I was not leaning on my sword, but I arose to receive him from my
seat of armour, my hands and face begrimed and blackened with blood
and smoke--clothes too. “I do remember when the fight was done,” &c.
&c. It came, as I said, forcibly to my mind as I eyed my friend’s
costume and sniffed the sweet-scented atmosphere that hovered round
him. The perfumed handkerchief, in this instance, held the place of
Shakespeare’s “pouncet-box”--the scene was pleasant to remember! With
a world of bows my man took leave, and proceeded, picking his steps
with the same care as he followed the route of his companions in the
direction of Hougoumont.

Having despatched our meal, and then the ammunition-waggons to
Waterloo, and leaving the people employed equipping as best they
could, I set off to visit the Château likewise; for the struggle that
had taken place there yesterday rendered it an object of interest.
The same scene of carnage as elsewhere characterised that part of the
field over which I now bent my steps. The immediate neighbourhood
of Hougoumont was more thickly strewn with corpses than most other
parts of the field--the very ditches were full of them. The trees
all about were most woefully cut and splintered, both by cannon-shot
and musketry. The courts of the Château presented a spectacle more
terrible even than any I had yet seen. A large barn had been set on
fire, and the conflagration had spread to the offices, and even to
the main building. Here numbers, both of French and English, had
perished in the flames, and their blackened swollen remains lay
scattered about in all directions. Amongst this heap of ruins and
misery many poor devils yet remained alive, and were sitting up
endeavouring to bandage their wounds. Such a scene of horror, and one
so sickening, was surely never witnessed.

Two or three German dragoons were wandering among the ruins, and
many peasants. One of the former was speaking to me when two of the
latter, after rifling the pockets, &c., of a dead Frenchman, seized
the body by the shoulders, and, raising it from the ground, dashed
it down again with all their force, uttering the grossest abuse, and
kicking it about the head and face--revolting spectacle!--doing this,
no doubt, to court favour with us. It had a contrary effect, which
they soon learned. I had scarcely uttered an exclamation of disgust,
when the dragoon’s sabre was flashing over the miscreants’ heads,
and in a moment descended on their backs and shoulders with such
vigour that they roared again, and were but too happy to make their
escape. I turned from such scenes and entered the garden. How shall I
describe the delicious sensation I experienced!

The garden was an ordinary one, but pretty--long straight walks
of turf overshadowed by fruit-trees, and between these beds of
vegetables, the whole enclosed by a tolerably high brick wall. Is
it necessary to define my sensations? Is it possible that I am not
understood at once? Listen then. For the last three days I have
been in a constant state of excitement--in a perfect fever. My eyes
have beheld nought but war in all its horrors--my ears have been
assailed by a continued roar of cannon and cracking of musketry, the
shouts of multitudes and the lamentations of war’s victims. Suddenly
and unexpectedly I find myself in solitude, pacing a green avenue,
my eyes refreshed by the cool verdure of trees and shrubs; my ear
soothed by the melody of feathered songsters--yea, of sweet Philomel
herself--and the pleasing hum of insects sporting in the genial
sunshine. Is there nothing in this to excite emotion? Nature in
repose is always lovely: here, and under such circumstances, she was
delicious. Long I rambled in this garden, up one walk, down another,
and thought I could dwell here contented for ever. Nothing recalled
the presence of war except the loopholed wall and two or three dead
Guardsmen;[26] but the first caused no interruption, and these last
lay so concealed amongst the exuberant vegetation of turnips and
cabbages, &c., that, after coming from the field of death without,
their pale and silent forms but little deteriorated my enjoyment.
The leaves were green, roses and other flowers bloomed forth in all
their sweetness, and the very turf when crushed by my feet smelt
fresh and pleasant. There was but little of disorder visible to tell
of what had been enacted here. I imagine it must have been assailed
by infantry alone; and the havoc amongst the trees without made by
our artillery posted on the hill above to cover the approach to
it--principally, perhaps, by Bull’s howitzer battery.

I had satisfied my curiosity at Hougoumont, and was retracing my
steps up the hill, when my attention was called to a group of wounded
Frenchmen by the calm, dignified, and soldier-like oration addressed
by one of them to the rest. I cannot, like Livy, compose a fine
harangue for my hero, and, of course, I could not retain the precise
words, but the import of them was to exhort them to bear their
sufferings with fortitude; not to repine, like women or children,
at what every soldier should have made up his mind to suffer as the
fortune of war, but, above all, to remember that they were surrounded
by Englishmen, before whom they ought to be doubly careful not to
disgrace themselves by displaying such an unsoldierlike want of
fortitude. The speaker was sitting on the ground, with his lance
stuck upright beside him--an old veteran, with a thick bushy grizly
beard, countenance like a lion--a lancer of the Old Guard, and no
doubt had fought in many a field. One hand was flourished in the air
as he spoke, the other, severed at the wrist, lay on the earth beside
him; one ball (case-shot, probably) had entered his body, another had
broken his leg. His suffering, after a night of exposure so mangled,
must have been great: yet he betrayed it not. His bearing was that
of a Roman, or perhaps of an Indian warrior, and I could fancy him
concluding appropriately his speech in the words of the Mexican king,
“And I too; am I on a bed of roses?” I could not but feel the highest
veneration for this brave man, and told him so, at the same time
offering him the only consolation in my power--a drink of cold water,
and assurances that the waggons would soon be sent round to collect
the wounded. He thanked me with a grace peculiar to Frenchmen, and
eagerly inquired the fate of their army. On this head I could tell
him nothing consolatory, so merely answered that it had retired last
night, and turned the conversation to the events of yesterday. This
truly brave man spoke in most flattering terms of our troops, but
said they had no idea in the French army we should have fought so
obstinately, since it was generally understood that the English
Government had, for some inexplicable reason, connived at Napoleon’s
escape from Elba, and therefore had ordered their army only to make
a show of resistance. After a very interesting conversation, I
begged his lance as a keepsake, observing that it never could be of
further use to him. The old man’s eyes kindled as I spoke, and he
emphatically assured me that it would delight him to see it in the
hands of a brave soldier, instead of being torn from him, as he had
feared, by those vile peasants. So I took my leave, and walked away
with the lance in my hand.[27] Ever since my groom (Milward) has
been transformed into my lancer-orderly; and I propose, if ever I
return to England, consecrating it to the memory of the interesting
old hero. In passing Bull’s bivouac it was my fate to witness another
very interesting scene. A wounded hussar had somehow or another found
his way there from another part of the field, and, exhausted by the
exertion, had just fainted. Some of those collected round him cried
out for water, and a young driver, who, being outside the throng, had
not yet seen the sufferer, seized a canteen, and ran away to fill
it. Whilst he was absent the hussar so far recovered as to be able
to sit up. The driver returned at this moment, and, pushing aside
his comrades, knelt down to enable the hussar to drink, holding the
canteen to his lips, and in so doing recognised a brother whom he had
not seen for years! His emotion was extreme, as may be supposed.

On regaining my own bivouac I found the ammunition arrived, and,
what was still more satisfactory, Mr Coates with his whole train of
Flemish waggons--our baggage and provisions. He had got intelligence
in time of the battle of Quatre Bras and its results, and therefore
altered his route to meet us on our retreat. On approaching the
Charleroi road he had been swept away by the torrent of fugitives,
and actually carried, _malgré lui_, beyond Brussels, some way on
the road to Antwerp, before he could succeed in disentangling his
train from the rabble rout, which he described as exceeding all
imagination. As he brought the wherewithal, &c., of course his
joining was hailed with joy by every one.

Since the order to send away my carriages I had received none; but
as my diminished troop was completed as far as could be done here,
I resolved to move off this horrid place; and accordingly, at three
P.M., we joyfully took to the Nivelles road--by instinct, perhaps,
for I knew nothing of the movements of the army, nor by what road
they had gone forward.[28] About a mile or so from the field I formed
our bivouac for the night in a sweet and wholesome orchard near the
road, with a turf-like velvet, and perfectly dry. This in itself was
a luxury; it was a luxury to breathe pure uncontaminated air; it was
a luxury to be out of hearing of groans, cries, and lamentations.
This was not all. Mr Coates brought us a ham and a cheese; the
neighbouring farmhouse supplied us with eggs, milk, and cider: so
that in due time we sat down to an excellent dinner, seasoned with
that sauce which no cook, however _scientific_, has yet learned to
equal--hunger. Hilarity reigned at our board--if we may so term the
fresh turf at the foot of an apple-tree; and over our grog and cigars
we managed to pass a most pleasant evening. Previously, I had caused
my servant to bring me a bucket of water, and prepared myself for
our repast by the enjoyment of that first of luxuries, a thorough
wash and clean clothes. This was the first time I had undressed
since leaving Strytem--four whole days and three whole nights. It
may be imagined with what joy I got rid of my bloody garments. Like
the birds, we all retired to rest with the close of day, and the
delicious sleep I enjoyed it is impossible to describe.

_20th._--Awoke early, and at first could not imagine where I was.
The cheerful sunbeams were playing amongst the leaves and branches
overhead. The farmer’s people were moving out with their cattle to
commence their daily labours. All was peace and rural tranquillity.
The events of the last four days passed across my recollection,
and I could for a moment scarcely believe them other than a
troubled dream; but I raised myself on my elbow, and there was the
battle-field, still encumbered with the slain. Ah! there it lay,
bathed in the full blaze of sunshine. Starting up, I roused our
people, and would have immediately recommenced the march, but upon
inquiry, found that, although the farriers had worked throughout the
night, they had not yet completed the shoeing. It was ten o’clock
before they did so; and then we put ourselves in movement on the road
to Nivelles, amidst crowds of stragglers, sutlers, &c., all pushing
forward to overtake the army. It was like the highroad to some great
fair. Every one appeared light-hearted, and it was delight to leave
_that_ field behind one.

Arrived at the gate of Nivelles, we found such a throng that there
were no hopes of passing for at least some hours. I therefore drew
up my troop in a pretty meadow by the roadside, where, besides
being out of the dust, we could enjoy the cool shelter of the fine
umbrageous elms by which it was surrounded, and water and feed our
cattle. Mr Coates had preceded us and procured a fat cow, which one
of our men slaughtered and cut up; and the meat being distributed,
we were provided with the needful wherever we might bivouac. Up
to this point I had no orders, nor did I know anything of the
armies--English, Prussian, or French. We knew, to be sure, that the
latter had been defeated on the 18th, and retired, followed by the
other two; but we had no notion of the extent of the defeat, and
therefore expected to find them again in position. Here I expected
to get some information when I could get into the town; but the gate
still continued so choked with waggons that it was impossible even
for an individual to enter except in turn.

An order overtook us here to send back an officer to take charge
of the guns and carriages we had left behind, until they could be
rehorsed and forwarded to us again. Lieutenant Hincks, who rejoined
us yesterday, being far from well, and suffering much from his
contusion, I with some difficulty persuaded him to take this duty.
On the opposite side of the road was a neat house, standing in a
shrubbery, apparently deserted. Some of my men, wandering into the
yard, discovered here three privates of the Guards. I forget what
account they gave of themselves, but remember they complained of
having eaten nothing for three days. We gave them a lump of beef and
some bread, not reflecting at the time on the strange circumstance
of their being thus left behind. I have since thought they remained
here with the intention of deserting as soon as the coast was clear.

At length I effected my own entrance into the town, hoping to gain
some information, or even meet some one who could give me orders.
The first thing that struck me on passing the gates was the contrast
the present aspect of the streets presented to that when we passed
through on the evening of the 16th. Then all was sadness, despair,
and lamentation; now all joy, confidence, and revel. The countenance
of every one you met beamed exultation and triumph, Belgians as
well as English. Men came up with frankness, took our hands, and
paid us some compliment. The women, by smiles and kind looks,
testified their sympathy; whilst the lower orders, in the joy of
their hearts, would slap one on the thigh, _en passant_, with an
emphatic “Bon!” “Brave garçon!” “Brave Anglais!” “Bon!” Or, if a
number were collected at some corner, they would demonstrate their
feelings by a cheer of “Vivent les Anglais!” The numerous cafés
and cabarets (of which every door and window was open on account
of the oppressive heat) were crammed with officers and soldiers of
every arm and of every nation, eating, drinking, swearing, singing,
and smoking. Music of some sort increased the _bouhara_ in most of
them. In many private houses, too, of the first appearance, large
parties of officers were regaling themselves; and even in the streets
many little assemblages of soldiers were to be seen enjoying their
pipes and their beer in some shady corner. It was one complete
scene of festivity. The streets were, moreover, crowded almost to
suffocation with scattered soldiery: columns on their march; long
files of country waggons laden with forage or provisions; together
with the pretty little, low, light baggage-waggons of the German
infantry, with their snow-white tilts. Here quartermasters and their
attendants were running about chalking the doors of the houses (the
headquarters were here to-night) with the names of those who were to
take up their temporary abode in them. “Lieutenant-Colonel ----” on
one; “Deputy-Assistant-Adjutant-General” on another; “1st company of
such a regiment” on another, and so on. Then several commissaries
(followed by a swarm of Flemish waggoners) hurry along in search of
the Magazin des Fourrages. Further on, officers of the general staff
are arranging the march of troops. Suddenly a loud shout announces
something extraordinary even on this day of excitement. Every one
hurries to the spot, pushing each other, jumping, shouting. “What
can it mean?” I inquired. “Monsieur l’Officiere, c’est un convoi
des prisonniers que vient d’arriver,” replied my man, doffing at
the same time his _bonnet de nuit_ and making a most respectful
salaam. I stopped to see the convoy pass. The prisoners, dressed in
grey _capôtes_ and _bonnets de fourrage_, march steadily on. Some
_vieux moustaches_ look very grave, and cast about furious glances
at the noisy crowd which follows them with the perseverance of a
swarm of mosquitoes, _sacréeing_ and venting all kind of illiberal
abuse on them and their b---- of an Emperor. Many, however, younger
men, laugh, joke, and return their abuse with interest, whilst the
soldiers of the escort (English) march doggedly along, pushing aside
the more forward of the throng, and apparently as if only marching
round a relief. The crowd passed on, and so did I, until, meeting
some of our own people, I learned that Sir Augustus Frazer was here,
and soon after found out his billet. To find one’s self in a quiet,
genteel, well-furnished room, after such scenes of bustle, &c., as
had occupied our last few days, is a pleasing change. Exactly such
was that in which I found Sir Augustus engaged with his adjutant.
He was in his slippers; his writing materials were arranged on the
table, and on another were some books and maps. The open windows
looked into a little shady garden gay with flowers and flowering
shrubs. There was an air of cheerfulness, of home and home’s comfort,
about the place that was quite refreshing. My visit was necessarily
a short one. I learned much more of our battle and its consequences
than I had known before, and that I had better push on with the crowd
until I got orders, or fell in with Lord Edward Somerset’s division.
Frazer and Bell told me many flattering things about G troop, and
considered it a certainty that I should get the brevet--_nous
verrons_!

Quitting them, I plunged again into the crowd and fought my way
towards the gate by which I had entered, but was agreeably surprised
at meeting my people in the street, Newland having pushed on the
moment he observed the crowd at the gate get somewhat thinner.
Traversing the town with our carriages proved a tedious operation;
for in addition to what I before found to struggle with, we now fell
in with an endless column of Belgic infantry marching the same route
as ourselves--a most annoying obstruction. The march of these people
was a sort of triumphal procession: colours displayed; bands, with
their clattering jangling cymbals, making a most martial noise;
officers and men prancing along with short quick steps, bended knees,
and stamping the pavement as if they wished to break holes in it,
swaggering like turkey-cocks, and trying to appear indifferent,
which was belied by the frequent upward glances at the fair dames in
the windows, who certainly were doing all they could to blow up the
vanity of these their brave countrymen by throwing out flowers on
them, waving of handkerchiefs, clapping of hands, and faintly crying
“Viva!”

We crept along the flank of this column of heroes, unnoticed and
unknown, and soon after, clearing the Porte de Binche, got ahead
and clear of them. The road was almost as much crowded as the
streets of Nivelles, and I found it useless to expect to make rapid
progress. For the first few miles the country was prettily wooded
and interspersed with villages and neat houses; but then it began
to get less wooded, less thickly inhabited, and in every way less
interesting. Continued struggling on until towards evening, when our
adjutant (Bell) overtook me with a little scrap of paper, on which
was an order for me to bivouac either at Rœulx or Binche; but as we
could not very well learn where these places were, and no guide was
to be procured, and the evening began to close in, I determined on
halting on a high and rather exposed piece of ground where we then
happened to be. The bivouac was badly chosen--no water near, no house
near, no wood near, no shelter of any kind near, and we were somehow
all cross and out of humour. Set the men to work, scrubbing and
cleaning appointments, this being the first opportunity of so doing.
Went to sleep at nightfall. I think the nearest village to us was
Haine. Some rustics who came to gape at us from a neighbouring farm
told us that the King of Westphalia and another French general had
passed the night of the 18th there with a few attendants, but that
early on the morning of the 19th they had departed in a great hurry,
evidently afraid of being overtaken.

_21st._--Paraded early, and, considering all things, tolerably
clean and neat. Descended to a lower country, equally dismal
and uninteresting, without the one advantage which the other
possesses--viz., that of commanding a distant prospect, always
more or less pleasing. At noon arrived in the neighbourhood of
Mons, where we overtook the Greys, Inniskillings, Ross’s troop
of Horse-Artillery, and several other corps, both of cavalry and
infantry. We had, in short, now rejoined the army. The Greys and the
Inniskillings were mere wrecks--the former, I think, did not muster
200 men, and the latter, with no greater strength, presented a sad
spectacle of disorganisation and bad discipline; they had lost more
than half their appointments. Some had helmets, some had none; many
had the skull-cap, but with the crest cut or broken off; some were
on their own large horses, others on little ones they had picked up;
belts there were on some; many were without, not only belts, but
also canteens and havresacks. The enemy surely had not effected in
a single day so complete a disorganisation, and I shrewdly suspect
these rollicking Paddies of having mainly _spoilt_ themselves. The
other corps all looked remarkably well, although they, too, had
partaken in the fight. We overtook these corps about a mile from
Mons, on a hill, whence that place, with its old fortifications,
looked venerable and picturesque. Descending thence, the road crossed
a broad, flat, marshy piece of ground, which appeared nearly, if
not entirely, to surround the place. Here our further progress was
obstructed by a number of trees felled across the road, and forming
a sort of abatis, and we were consequently obliged to make a detour
through the meadows, and cross a rivulet by (I think the Trouille) a
mill-dam, over which the cavalry were obliged to file. This rendered
it a very tedious operation; and that part where at the mill we had
to pass our guns, &c., over a bridge of planks barely broad enough,
was a rather ticklish one. We crossed after the Greys, and came with
them on the main road to Maubeuge at the moment a Highland regiment
(perhaps the 92d), which had come through Mons, was passing. The
moment the Highlanders saw the Greys an electrifying cheer burst
spontaneously from the column, which was answered as heartily;
and on reaching the road the two columns became blended for a few
minutes--the Highlanders running to shake hands with their brave
associates in the late battle. This little burst of feeling was
delightful--everybody felt it; and although two or three general
officers were present, none interfered to prevent or to censure this
breach of discipline. A few hundred yards further on I found Lord
Edward Somerset, with his brigade, formed in a field of clover by
the roadside; and now, for the _first time_, I reported myself to
him, and requested orders. These were simply to proceed straight to
Malplaquet, and there bivouac for the night. Accordingly I continued
my route independent as heretofore of my brigade. Nothing could be
more horridly uninteresting than this country. Well cultivated, yet
no habitations, or very few--no enclosures, or rather no hedges,
there being banks to some of the fields; no trees, and hills just
high enough to prevent an extended view, without adding one jot
of beauty to the landscape. Most dismal country! To add to our
wretchedness, the clouds which had been collecting all the morning
began to drop their contents, so, snugging ourselves under our
cloaks, on we jogged sulkily enough. We had left the great Chaussée
de Maubeuge, and had been marching some time on a cross-road,
occasionally confined between bare banks--not such ramparts as one
sees in the county of Cork, but low clay banks about knee-high, with
the ditch whence the material has been taken. In this way we had
reached a point where a greater elevation of the ground allowed some
scope of vision; and when emerging from between the banks, we came on
something like a heath, bordered on one side by a large wood. Here an
assemblage of rustics appeared awaiting us. Their principal object,
no doubt, was to gaze at the strangers; but they gave themselves
infinite trouble to make us comprehend that we were about to cross
the frontier and enter on the soil of France. Drawing a long line in
the mud, right across the road, and vociferating altogether, “Ici,
monsieur!” “Voila, monsieur!” “Regardez, monsieur!” “C’est ici,
monsieur, que vous entrez en la France!” and when we crossed their
line, they grinned and jumped about like so many monkeys. I could
not divine what pleasure they derived from seeing strangers violate
the sacred territory, nor what could induce the energetic “Voici,
monsieur, la France, voilà la Belgique!” which they roared in chorus.
How different would have been the feelings and actions of Englishmen
on a similar occasion! Frenchmen, however, draw amusement from
everything--even misfortune. But did they look upon our invasion as
a misfortune? From what I have seen of these people, it appears very
doubtful whether they care a farthing who reigns over them. Be that
as it may, we undoubtedly entered France amidst cheers and greetings
of the populace.

Soon after this we arrived at Malplaquet without being able to see
it--the truth is, that it consists of a number of large farm-houses,
&c., all standing isolated, and surrounded by thick orchards. In
one of these we established our bivouac. A beggarly-looking old
house, built of wattles, plastered with clay (which in many places
had fallen off), windows without glass, and doorways without doors,
stood in one corner of our orchard, and as this was very cheerless
from the heavy rain, we agreed to do comfortable and dine in the
_house_. Accordingly, our prog and materials were conveyed thither,
and the dame was desired to make a fire in her best _salon_; yet,
after all, it was a matter of doubt whether we should not have been
more comfortable under the apple-trees, barring the droppings. The
place was a perfect picture of misery; rooms disgustingly filthy, and
besides, blackened with smoke; floor of earth, broken into all sorts
of holes and inequalities; ceiling of loose planks and full of large
holes, as were the partitions; furniture--a rickety table, two or
three as rickety chairs, and a sort of chest of walnut, serving the
place of a chest of drawers, black as ebony from age and dirt. The
mistress, a grown-up daughter, and three or four young children, were
the only inmates of this wretched mansion we saw--filthy as their
dwelling, their clothes all in rags, and without shoe or stocking.
These poor creatures were so alarmed at us that they scarcely seemed
to know what they were doing. Our dinner, of course, was none of the
most comfortable; but some hot grog and cigars afterwards put us all
in good-humour, and we passed the evening admirably. In due time we
retired to the nests our servants had provided for us in the orchard,
and I was soon sound asleep, but was aroused about two o’clock by the
sergeant-major, with a lantern in one hand and a paper in the other,
which a dragoon had just brought from headquarters. This was an order
to march at four A.M. Raining hard.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, EDINBURGH.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The port of Ostend is what people usually term a “dry harbour.”
It is dry at low tide, but the flood brings in about 16 or 18 feet
water.

[2] _Ghistel_, according to the map of Maillart, &c.

[3] The Church of Notre Dame ceased to be a cathedral 1801, when it
was united to the diocese of Ghent.

[4] M‘Donald’s troop had arrived ten days before us.

[5] La Folle Marguerite (?), 18 feet long and 3 feet in diameter,
near the Marché de Vendredi; it is called the Mannekens Aert. It is
named after a Countess of Flanders celebrated for the violence of
her temper. It is also designated the Wonder of Ghent, is made of
malleable iron, and, according to another account, was used by Philip
Van Arteveldt at the siege of Oudenarde in 1382.--Quin’s ‘Moselle,’
&c., vol. i. p. 160.

[6] The moat supplied us daily a dish of very fine carp, and the
gardener’s sons occasionally shot us a hare or two.

[7] Such crops I never before saw, particularly those vividly-green
crops of _trèf_, which really appeared so thick that one might walk
on them without sinking to the ground. But to me the height attained
by the rye was most astonishing. In one field which I rode through
nearly every day, it was as high as my head, when mounted on my
little horse Cossack, about 14¾ hands high, so that it could not have
been less than 7 or 8 feet, the ears remarkably full and looking well.

[8] The _captains were_--viz., Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Hew D. Ross,
Major Bull, ---- Ramsay, Lieutenant-Colonel W. Smyth, Major M‘Donald,
Captain Mercer.

[9] The Duke of Wellington was so indifferent to the manner in which
officers dressed, that they indulged in all sorts of fancies. I
remember, at this inspection, Ramsay wore the light-cavalry belt
instead of a sash; Bull wore beard and mustache; so did Newland;
I wore the mustache. The usual dress of hussars was frock-coat
open, with a red waistcoat richly laced with gold. At that time our
regimental pantaloons were _pepper-and-salt_, with straps of brown
leather inside the legs and round the bottom, and a red stripe down
outside seam.

[10] A report _was_ sent to Brussels, but it never reached the Duke,
for the simple people went in the first instance to Sir G. Wood, and
there it was strangled.

[11] We had been ordered nearly a fortnight ago to keep this quantity
ready, and the hay rolled, &c. &c.

[12] I believe this is the Bois de la Houssier.

[13] Sir Hussey Vivian’s, I believe.

[14] These appear to have been the cuirassiers of Milhaud, together
with the light cavalry of the corps commanded by Count Lobau, sent to
assist Ney in his attack on Quatre Bras.--See O’Meara’s ‘Translation
of Memoir of Napoleon,’ lib. ix. cap. v. p. 109.

[15] That this was Napoleon we have the authority of General
Gourgand, who states that, irritated at the delay of Marshal Ney,
he put himself at the head of the chasseurs (I think), and dashed
forward in the hope of yet being able to catch our rear-guard.

[16] This was the spot where Picton fell on the morrow, and in this
hedge was the so well-known Wellington Tree.

[17] The light cavalry of the 2d Corps formed in three lines across
the causeway from Nivelle, &c., nearly at the height of the first
woods at Hougoumont, scouring all the plain by the left, and having
main guards near Braine le Leude, and its battery of light artillery
on the causeway of Nivelle.--‘Memoir of Napoleon,’ lib. ix. cap. vi.
p. 134; O’Meara’s Translation.

[18] I believe Jägers of the Hanoverian corps.

[19] One day, on the Marine Parade at Woolwich, a battalion coming up
in close column at the double march, Lieutenant-Colonel Brown, who
stood near me, remarked, “That puts me in mind of your troop coming
up at Waterloo, when you _saved_ the Brunswickers.” Until this moment
I never knew that our having done so had been remarked by anybody;
but he assured me it was known to the whole army; and yet the Duke
not only withheld that praise which was our due, but refused me the
brevet rank of major; and, more than that, actually deprived me of
that troop given to me by Lord Mulgrave, the then Master-General,
_for_ that action, as recommended by my commanding officer, Sir G.
Adams Wood.

That the Duke was not ignorant of their danger I have from Captain
Baynes, our Brigade-Major, who told me that after Sir Augustus Frazer
had been sent for us, his Grace exhibited considerable anxiety for
our coming up; and that when he saw us crossing the fields at a
gallop, and in so compact a body, he actually cried out, “Ah! that’s
the way I like to see horse-artillery move.” Another proof.

[20] The following extract, from a related account of a conscript,
translated from the French and published by Murray, is so true and
exact as to need no comment:--“Through the smoke I saw the English
gunners abandon their pieces, all but six guns stationed under the
road, and almost immediately our cuirassiers were upon the squares,
whose fire was drawn in zig-zags. Now, I thought, those gunners would
be cut to pieces; but no, the devils kept firing with grape, which
mowed them down like grass.” It is pleasant, after all, to find we
were observed and spoken of as we deserved, though not by those who
ought to have done it. I may here mention that Sir James Shaw Kennedy
in his book is, I think, mistaken in saying that the Brunswickers
were saved by Major Bull’s and Captain Mercer’s batteries, since
after the usual interval on the right of the Brunswick square
occurred one of English and then Major Bull’s battery, and the front
of the French attacking column was only equal to our own.

[21] These grenadiers à cheval were very fine troops, clothed in blue
uniforms without facings, cuffs, or collars. Broad, very broad buff
belts, and huge muff caps, made them appear gigantic fellows.

[22] Gourgand says:--“Cette division de deux mille grenadiers à
cheval, et dragons tous gens d’élite, s’étaient engagés sur le
plateau, sans l’ordre de l’Empereur,” &c. &c.--P. 88., ed. London.
He speaks of the cavalry of reserve of the Guard. Could these be the
people?

[23] “The field was so much covered with blood, that it appeared
as if it had been flooded with it,” &c.--Simpson’s ‘Paris after
Waterloo,’ &c., p. 21.

[24] At one time I thought this a French _ruse de guerre_. I remember
the man perfectly, with his silver arrow and chain attached to his
black shoulder-belt. In Sir John Sinclair’s ‘Translation of Baron
Muffling’s Account,’ London, 1816, and at p. 29, I find that about 4
P.M., whilst the cuirassiers, after charging through the 1st British
line, were roaming over the interval between it and the 2d, “the
enemy advanced a battalion on the plain of the platform, at hardly
500 yards’ distance from the position, so as, perhaps, to establish
his infantry on this side of the little wood of Hougoumont and in
La Haye Sainte.” Could this have been the one? At p. 35 he says,
“The shot from Bulow’s artillery reached the British, and the Duke
was obliged to send notice of it.” Query--Did the Duke observe this
himself, or was it communicated to him by my black hussar?

[25] Here were more cuirasses than men; for the wounded (who could
move), divesting themselves of its encumbrance, had made their
escape, leaving their armour on the ground where they had fallen.

[26] In some accounts of the battle, and visits to the field, &c., it
has been stated that this garden was a scene of slaughter. Totally
untrue! As I have stated in the text, I did not see above two or
three altogether. There certainly might have been more concealed
amongst the vegetation, but they could not have been many.

[27] During the remainder of the campaign Milward carried it; and
on returning to England I even rode into Canterbury followed by my
lancer--a novelty in those days. Whilst in retirement on half-pay,
it was suspended in my library; but on going to America in 1823
I deposited it in the Rotunda at Woolwich. On my return in 1829
the lance was gone. In 1823 or 1824 it seems Lieutenant-Colonel
Vandaleur, of the 9th Lancers, came to Woolwich to look for a model.
Mine pleased him, and he took it to St John’s Wood Riding-House,
where it was tried against others in presence of the Duke of York,
and approved of as a model for arming the British lancers. After
a long hunt I at last found it at the Enfield manufactory, spoilt
completely, the iron-work and thong taken off, and flag gone. It cost
me a long correspondence with the Board before I succeeded in getting
it restored and put together. When I received it from him who had
so long wielded it, the flag was dyed in blood, the blade notched,
and also stained with blood; inside the thong was cut Clement, VII.,
probably the number of his troop. [It is now in the possession of Dr
Hall, an old Waterloo man, and sincere friend of my father.--ED.]

[28] Sir George Wood incurred the Duke’s extreme displeasure for not
securing and parking the French guns immediately after the action,
for the Prussians got hold of many of them; and it was only through
the indefatigable activity of Sir Augustus Frazer that they were
regained--partly by coaxing, partly by blustering. However, they were
all recovered.




MESSRS W. BLACKWOOD & SONS’

_PUBLICATIONS_.


SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON, Bart.

  THE HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, FROM ITS COMMENCEMENT TO
  THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO.

  LIBRARY EDITION, with Portraits, 14 vols, demy 8vo, £10, 10s.
  CABINET EDITION, 20 vols, crown 8vo, £6.
  PEOPLE’S EDITION, 12 vols, and Index Vol., £2, 11s.

  CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY, from the FALL OF NAPOLEON TO THE
  ACCESSION OF LOUIS NAPOLEON.

  LIBRARY EDITION, 8 vols, demy 8vo, £6, 7s. 6d.
  PEOPLE’S EDITION, 8 vols, crown 8vo, and Index, £1, 14s.

  ATLAS OF PLANS OF COUNTRIES, BATTLES, SIEGES, AND SEA-FIGHTS,
  Illustrative of the History of Europe from the Commencement of
  the French Revolution to the Battle of Waterloo. Constructed by
  A. KEITH JOHNSTON, F.R.S.E., &c. &c. With Vocabulary of Military
  and Marine Terms. 109 Plates, demy 4to, price £3, 3s. Another
  Edition, in crown 4to, £1, 11s. 6d.


Colonel E. B. HAMLEY.

  THE OPERATIONS OF WAR EXPLAINED AND ILLUSTRATED. Second Edition.
  Revised throughout by the Author, and containing important
  additions, on the influence of Railways and Telegraphs on War,
  and on the Effects which the Changes in Weapons may be expected
  to produce in Tactics. Quarto, 17 Maps and Plans, with other
  Illustrations, £1, 8s.


By the same Author.

  WELLINGTON’S CAREER; A MILITARY AND POLITICAL SUMMARY. By COLONEL
  E. B. HAMLEY, formerly Professor of Military History, Strategy,
  and Tactics at the Staff College. Crown 8vo, 2s.


Captain HAMILTON.

  ANNALS OF THE PENINSULAR CAMPAIGNS. A New Edition. Edited by F.
  HARDMAN, Esq. 8vo, 16s.; and Atlas of Maps to illustrate the
  Campaigns, 12s.


A. W. KINGLAKE.

  THE INVASION OF THE CRIMEA: ITS ORIGIN AND AN ACCOUNT OF ITS
  PROGRESS DOWN TO THE DEATH OF LORD RAGLAN.

  VOLUMES I. and II. Fourth Edition. 32s.
  VOLUMES III. and IV. Second Edition. 34s.


ANDREW WILSON.

  THE “EVER-VICTORIOUS ARMY.” A HISTORY OF THE CHINESE CAMPAIGN
  UNDER LIEUT.-COL. C. G. GORDON, AND OF THE SUPPRESSION OF THE
  TAI-PING REBELLION. By ANDREW WILSON, F.A.S.L., Author of
  ‘England’s Policy in China;’ and formerly Editor of the ‘China
  Mail.’ 1 vol. 8vo, with Maps, price 15s.

  “This able and interesting volume, by a writer who has given
  close attention to Chinese affairs, and has had the advantage
  of residing some time in the country, appears at an opportune
  moment.”--_Pall Mall Gazette._


Major DWYER.

  SEATS AND SADDLES, BITS AND BITTING, AND THE PREVENTION AND CURE
  OF RESTIVENESS IN HORSES. By FRANCIS DWYER, Major of Hussars in
  the Imperial Austrian Service. A New and Enlarged Edition. Price
  7s. 6d.


“MAGENTA.”

  THE HANDY HORSE-BOOK; or, PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS IN DRIVING,
  RIDING, AND THE GENERAL CARE AND MANAGEMENT OF HORSES. By
  “MAGENTA.” Fifth Edition, with Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

  “Evidently the work of no unskilled hand.”--_Bell’s Life._

  “There is scarcely a single sentence which does not convey sound
  and valuable information.”--_Sporting Gazette._

  “This is a book to be read and re-read by all who take an
  interest in the noble animal.”--_Sporting Magazine._

  “By all means buy the book; it will repay the outlay.”--_Land and
  Water._


By the same Author.

  OUR DOMESTICATED DOGS; THEIR TREATMENT IN REFERENCE TO FOOD,
  DISEASES, HABITS, PUNISHMENT, ACCOMPLISHMENTS, &c. 2s. 6d.


WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, Edinburgh and London.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg x: ‘Lokern--A Village’ replaced by ‘Lokeren--A Village’.
  Pg xi: ‘Allée-Vert’ replaced by ‘Allée-Verte’.
  Pg 55: ‘des Logemens’ replaced by ‘des Logements’ (twice).
  Pg 87: ‘These good poople’ replaced by ‘These good people’.
  Pg 123: ‘had in no wise’ replaced by ‘had nowise’.
  Pg 140: ‘in abunance amongst’ replaced by ‘in abundance amongst’.
  Pg 147: ‘Jan Evanpoel, the’ replaced by ‘Jan Evenpoel, the’.
  Pg 155: ‘Schandelbeke and’ replaced by ‘Schendelbeke and’.
  Pg 155: ‘Lerbeke, &c.’ replaced by ‘Lebbeke, &c.’.
  Pg 160: subtotal ‘214’ replaced by ‘215’.
  Pg 165: ‘of the _trèfe_’ replaced by ‘of the _trèfle_’.
  Pg 186: ‘there waters and’ replaced by ‘their waters and’.
  Pg 207: ‘allée-vert’ replaced by ‘allée-verte’.
  Pg 208: ‘happy, consequenty’ replaced by ‘happy, consequently’.
  Pg 213: ‘picturesqe costume’ replaced by ‘picturesque costume’.
  Pg 217: ‘beautful battery’ replaced by ‘beautiful battery’.
  Pg 255: paragraph ends unexpectedly with ‘... to peep of the’.
          This has been left unchanged.
  Pg 255: ‘fire of musquetry’ replaced by ‘fire of musketry’
          (all seventeen other occurrences are ‘musketry’ ).
  Pg 256: ‘began to dose’ replaced by ‘began to doze’.
  Pg 283: ‘as we we could see’ replaced by ‘as we could see’.
  Pg 306: ‘came in collison’ replaced by ‘came in collision’.
  Pg 312: ‘and to enconomise’ replaced by ‘and to economise’.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOURNAL OF THE WATERLOO CAMPAIGN, VOL. 1 (OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


